content
Good evening. I'm Jim Lehrer. On the NewsHour tonight: The
news of this day; then the president's new budget proposal,
with differing reactions from Senators Judd Gregg and Kent Conrad;
an update report on peace progress between Israel and the
Palestinians; a health unit look at ways to prevent deadly
medical errors; and some thoughts from sports author John Feinstein
about the varied meanings of the Super Bowl. President Bush
sent his 2006 budget to Congress today. It marked the
opening of a major battle over federal priorities. The budget
totaled more than $2.5 trillion, with a record deficit of
$427 billion. Overall, it would boost spending for defense and
homeland security, but cut scores of other programs. The president
said it sets priorities in a fiscally responsible way. House
Democratic leader Nancy Pelosi called it a "hoax" because the
costs of Iraq and Social Security changes were not included.
We'll have our full coverage of the story right after
this News Summary. Israel and the Palestinians announced plans today
for a formal ceasefire, to end four years of violence.
Palestinian President Abbas and Israeli Prime Minister Sharon will formally
declare the truce tomorrow at a summit in Egypt. An
Israeli representative said it's the first step in getting back
on track toward a peace agreement. Declarations in and by
themself are not sufficient but I think this time the
declaration has substance behind it because I think both sides--
the Israelis and the Palestinians--are very serious in an
effort not to lose this opportunity and to move forward.
The Palestinians said the deal also calls for joint committees
to oversee Israeli pullbacks in the West Bank. The announcement
came after U.S. Secretary of State Rice visited the region.
She said President Abbas and Prime Minister Sharon will meet
separately with President Bush in Washington. And she said the
U.S. wants to seize the moment. I'm here in my
first ten or so days as secretary of state to
demonstrate that commitment. Not everything has to involve the United
States, but the United States has to be there when
it is needed. We will be very active. We'll have
more on this story later in the program. At least
28 people died in a series of attacks across Iraq
today. In Baqubah, a car bomb killed at least 15
people outside a police building. In Mosul, a suicide bomber
killed 12 policemen at a hospital compound. Another person died
in a mortar attack in Mosul. And over the weekend,
insurgents killed at least 21 Iraqis and three U.S. soldiers.
A Kurdish coalition moved into second place today, in the
vote count in Iraq. A Shiite alliance, backed by Grand
Ayatollah al-Sistani, remained in first place with well over two
million votes. The Kurdish grouping of two parties had more
than one million votes and a bloc headed by Prime
Minister Allawi was running third. Returns so far have indicated
most Sunni Muslims did not vote. A final tally is
expected Thursday. U.N. Secretary-General Annan today suspended two top officials
involved in the oil-for-food program in Iraq. Last week, an
independent report accused the program's former head of a "grave
conflict of interest" in handling oil deals with Iraq. The
report also said another official, in charge of awarding contracts,
had tainted the process. The two men can appeal the
suspensions. A jury in Massachusetts today convicted a key figure
in the Catholic Church's sex abuse scandal. Defrocked priest Paul
Shanley was found guilty in Cambridge of raping a boy
in the 1980s. He showed no emotion as the verdict
was read. The abuse began when the victim was six
years old. He's now 27. Shanley is now 74. He
faces a possible life sentence. On Wall Street today, the
Dow Jones Industrial Average lost less than one point to
close at 10,715. The NASDAQ fell four points to close
at 2082. The city of Boston geared up for another
victory parade today. This time it will be for the
New England Patriots' victory in the Super Bowl. They beat
the Philadelphia Eagles 24-21 on Sunday, in Jacksonville, Florida. It
was New England's third NFL championship in four years and
the second in a row. We'll have more on the
Super Bowl at the end of the program tonight. And
between now and then: the budget, Senators Gregg and Conrad,
a Middle East update, and medical errors. President Bush put
a proposed budget on the public and congressional table today.
Kwame Holman begins our coverage. Representing the House Budget Committee,
Kansas Republican Jim Ryun was one of the first to
receive a copy of the president's budget when they were
delivered to the capitol early this morning. A lot of
numbers, a lot of good reading. The nearly 2,500-page document
lays out more than $2.5 trillion of federal spending for
fiscal year 2006, and includes the first cut in basic
domestic programs since Ronald Reagan was president. Meeting with his
cabinet this morning, President Bush defended his budget. I fully
understand that sometimes it's hard to eliminate a program that
sounds good. But by getting people to focus on results
and saying to members of Congress, "show us the results
as to whether or not this program is working," I
think we'll get a pretty good response. Presidents send their
budgets to Congress early in February hoping to influence the
final legislative decisions members will make by the start of
the new fiscal year in October. And traditionally, members immediately
rate the proposals anywhere from "a good starting point" to
"dead on arrival." In that tradition, Senate Democratic leader Harry
Reid today called the president's budget "the most irresponsible and
misleading budget in our nation's history." And at his briefing
this afternoon, the president's budget director Josh Bolten said recent
history is on President Bush's side. I imagine that you
all have already gotten some "dead on arrival" comments from
folks on the Hill. The same thing was said last
year. In the end, the Congress delivered the totals that
the president sought. Now, a lot of the details are
different and that is Congress's responsibility to make appropriations decisions,
subject to the president's signature. The president's budget is a
blueprint of how much he wants the government to spend,
offset by how much revenue he expects it to collect.
But because spending once again will far exceed revenues, the
government will have to borrow hundreds of billions of dollars
to make up the difference. The projected deficit this year
alone is $427 billion. But Budget Director Bolten says if
Congress follows the president's budget proposals, annual deficits could be
cut in half by 2009, a promise made by the
president during last week's state of the union address. It’s
never unanimously popular to propose any savings. The spending is
in the budget for a reason, because somebody wanted it
there. But in an era of limited resources, we need
to set some priorities and I'm optimistic that we'll get
some good cooperation from the Congress. While defense and homeland
security are slated for large increases, the president's budget calls
for eliminating or drastically scaling back some 150 federal programs.
They include: Government support for farmers--price supports would be
reduced on a wide range of crops; federal grant programs
for local schools, vocational education, anti-drug efforts and literacy programs
would be cut back; Medicaid, which provides health care for
the poor, would have its growth restrained; the Army Corps
of Engineers, whose dam and waterway projects are extremely popular
in Congress, would receive less funding than it did in
2005; and federal subsidies for Amtrak's operation would be eliminated.
Today, Democrats said those cuts are the wrong way to
reduce the deficit. John Spratt of South Carolina is the
top Democrat on the House Budget Committee. They're real and
they hurt and yet for all of the hurt these
accounts hardly move deficit at all. This is the irony
of what they have proposed here as a budget solution.
These programs have proved themselves and they have stood the
test of time. Yet they're cutting them. We simply take
it back to the American people and throw it to
the Congress and say, "Is this really what you want
to buy into?" Democrats also argue that the president's plan
only achieves its deficit-reduction goals by leaving out big-ticket spending
items, such as the cost of keeping troops in Iraq
and Afghanistan, and paying for his top domestic priority, revamping
Social Security. Budget Director Bolten. The budget went to bed
a couple of weeks, two or three weeks ago and
so before the president's proposals were announced. And the president's
Social Security proposals are still in formulation, in a process
of consultation with the Congress. We're just reflecting now for
you what we do know about the immediate deficit effects
of the personal account formulation that the president advertised. There's
a lot more, though, to go to know what the
real numbers are going out into the future. Also left
out of the president's budget was the future cost of
making Mr. Bush's first-term tax cuts permanent. Democrats today said
those hidden costs will lead the nation further into debt.
North Dakota's Kent Conrad: He is taking us to a
future in which massive cuts will be required. There will
be massive cuts. I'm predicting today massive cuts in Social
Security, massive cuts in Medicare under this president's plan. He's
going to take us right over the cliff into massive
deficits and massive debt that will harm the American economy
for a long time to come. Congress begins the process
of examining the president's budget tomorrow, with hearings on both
the House and Senate sides of the Capitol. Margaret Warner
picks up the congressional debate over the new budget. And
for that I'm joined by the two Senate leaders who
have primary responsibility for dealing with the budget in the
months ahead. Senator Judd Gregg of New Hampshire is the
chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, and Senator Kent Conrad
of North Dakota is the committee's ranking Democrat. Welcome to
you both. Senator Gregg, you expressed great support for this
budget today. You called it...you said the president should
be congratulated. What do you like about it? Well, I
like the fact that he's put forward a specific set
of ideas for restraining the growth of spending, both on
the discretionary side, and a large number of the entitlement
accounts, whether it's agriculture or Medicaid. On the discretionary side,
he's basically kept non-defense discretionary at a less than the
rate of inflation growth. On the defense side, he's actually
reduced the rate of growth of the base of defense.
So it's a pretty aggressive statement of trying to institute
some policies to discipline our fiscal house. And Senator Conrad,
you were, to say the least, not very complimentary. What
don't you like about it? I think this budget by
the president takes us just one more step down the
trail of record deficits and record debt, and debt and
deficits that explode as the president's proposals get enacted. You
know, he just left out a lot of things. When
he says he's going to cut the deficit in half
over the next five years, he left out war costs;
there's no war costs past September 30 of this year.
He left out the trillions of dollars that his Social
Security privatization plan will cost. He left out $700 billion
needed to fix the alternative minimum cost. Minimum tax. He
just left out so many things. He left out making
permanent the tax cuts that cost $1.7 trillion over the
next ten years. You put all those things back together,
and what you have is a pattern that takes us
deeper and deeper into deficit and debt. Senator Gregg, what's
your response to that--because that's the criticism from the
Democrats here, that there's so many big-ticket items that aren't
included, how credible should the American people look upon these
projections of cutting the deficit in half by 2009? Well,
first off, they can look very much at what the
president has proposed in specific spending restraint. And we'll look
forward to our Democratic colleagues joining us in restraining those
spending programs if they're interested in reducing the deficit. As
to the specific issue of, for example, war costs, five
years from now hopefully we won't be at war. In
fact, I'm sure we won't be at war in Iran
or Iraq--or in Iraq or Afghanistan. And as a
result, we shouldn't be building that number into the base,
the war costs into the base. The revenues which the
senator from North Dakota appears to want to increase by
raising taxes, that's not the approach that we want to
take. But if they believe they should raise taxes to
reduce this deficit, then let them bring forward a budget
that raises taxes, or let them bring forward a budget
that promotes their cuts. But where--if there are all
these other costs that are known--that are known to
be in fact incurred--Well, I don't accept...You don't
accept the $81 billion that the administration is about to
command the Iraq War? I don't have any problem with
stating that number, but I don't think you build it
into the base, because five years from now, it's not
going to be there. That number goes away. This is
not a one-time item. It is going to be a
two- or three-year item. Two or three years from now,
I don't want to increase defense spending by the cost
of that war, so that the defense base suddenly has
$80 billion of extra funds in it after the war
is over. And I think that would be a bad
policy. You talked about reducing the deficit in half in
four years. I think the president has put on the
table legitimate numbers that move us in that direction rather
aggressively. And I have heard from the other side nothing
from their proposals to accomplish deficit reduction other than raising
taxes. In my opinion, that wouldn't help the economy. It
probably would slow revenue growth in many ways, as a
result of the economy slowing down. Senator Conrad, what would
be the Democrats' alternative? Well, first of all, I want
to correct a couple of misimpressions. I've not advocated raising
taxes. I have said revenue has to be part of
the solution, and the first place we ought to look
for revenue is the tax gap. That is the difference
between what is owed and what is being paid. The
Bush administration itself says that that gap was $300 billion
in 2001. That's people who are getting away without paying
what they owe, shoving the rest of the burden onto
all the rest of us who do pay what we
owe. That would be the first place I'd look. Second,
they talk about spending restraint. Is there really spending restraint
in this budget? The president's budget increases spending by 8
percent over last year. Now, they've put a lot of
focus on the cuts. I understand that. But if you
look at the overall budget, it increases spending 8 percent.
At the same time, the president says cut the revenue
$1.7 trillion, we already have record deficits. You know, when
you increase spending and you cut revenue, and you can't
pay your bills to begin with, there's only one possible
outcome. That's more deficit, more debt, more borrowing, and a
weaker America. That's the prescription in this president's plan. Let
me just ask Senator Conrad--I would just like to
just quickly respond on this-Okay.--on two points. First,
the spending restraint is there, and we will see whether
or not our colleagues on the other side of the
aisle are willing to address it. The increases in spending
which the senator mentions--which are legitimate numbers--go to
fighting the war and Medicare primarily. Now, maybe they're willing
to cut the efforts in defense and maybe they're willing
to cut the efforts in Medicare, but I doubt it.
Non-discretionary defense spending is kept below the rate of inflation.
And there are proposals to reduce spending on the agriculture
programs, which I doubt that the other side is going
to be too excited about, and in other entitlements such
as Medicaid. On the revenue side, let's remember, revenues are
going up rather dramatically. Last year they increased by 9.2
percent. This year they're projected to increase by 6.5 percent.
We're headed on a path to receive much more in
the way of revenues as a result of the fact
that we shallowed out this recession by putting a tax
cut in place early on in the recession so that
we didn't have a significant economic--as significant an economic
downturn as we might have had. So we're getting significant
revenue growth, and putting a tax cut on top of
this economy would be very counterproductive. All right, Senator Conrad,
let me--let's talk now about the actual cuts. And
I take your point that the overall budget is growing,
but there is an actual cut in this non-homeland security,
non-defense part of the budget. Do you have a quarrel
with those specific cuts, and if you don't, where else
would you cut? I mean, if you do, where else
would you cut? Yeah, there are priorities here that I
think are badly misplaced. For example, I would not cut
the cops program by 96 percent. Cops program has put
100,000 police officers on the street in this country. That's
reduced crime. When we've got a terrorist threat, why ever
would you reduce the number of police on the street?
I wouldn't cut the firefighters by 30 percent. I wouldn't
eliminate funding for vocational education. You know, not everybody goes
to college. And to eliminate the education for those who
are going to go into the trades I just think
is shortsighted for this country. So there are cuts that
don't make sense. There are other cuts, frankly, that I
do support. I think we do need to go after
states that are abusing and taking advantage of the Medicaid
system. I would support limitations, payment limitations in agriculture, even
though I come from a farm state. So there are
places I would support the cuts. There are others that
I think are very misplaced. But overall, remember, this is
not a budget that cuts spending. It increases spending 8%,
even though we already have record deficits. And then the
president turns around and says, oh, by the way, cut
the revenue base by nearly $2 trillion on top of
it. There can only be one result. That's more deficits
and more debt. Going to the cuts, Senator Gregg, a
lot of these cuts--I mean, there are others--the
ones Senator Conrad named, and also things like increasing the
cost to some veterans for the health care benefits they
receive, eliminating Amtrak. All of these programs have powerful constituencies
on Capitol Hill, including with your own fellow Republicans. How
realistic is it that these cuts will get through? Well,
first off, I want to congratulate Senator Conrad if he's
willing to address agriculture from North Dakota. I congratulate him--
equally so in the Medicaid areas. I certainly hope we
can reach agreement on those two areas. Well, my view
is that last year we showed that we can discipline
the budget on a discretionary side and on defense when
we set a number of $822 billion. The Congress wanted
to spend considerably more than that. The White House said
no, and we ended up with $822 billion. If we
can reach agreement on a top line number--this year
the White House is suggesting $840 billion--and then let
the Congress set its priorities within that number, there may
be programs we'll support that the president doesn't support, and
there may be programs he supports that we will support.
Let us work out the details, but at least agree
on a top line number that is enforceable by something
called spending caps. And that's the way you make this
work. Is that doable, Senator Conrad? Do you think you
can agree on an overall number at least, and then
let the appropriators decide where the cuts come? I would
hope we could. And one thing where Senator Gregg and
I think are joined is on the spending disciplines; that
is, restoring the old pay-go rules that say if you're
going to increase spending or you're going to cut taxes,
you've got to pay for it. And that's a discipline
we badly need reenacted around here, and I'm hoping on
a bipartisan basis we can do that. Senator Conrad, let
me ask you this. If you look at--whether it's
the five-year part of this budget or the ten-year, we
are now seeing deficits, as the old saying goes, "as
far as the eye can see." Do you think we
will ever get back to the point of balancing the
federal books? It's critical that we do. The thing that
I most fault the president on is that he has
left the American people with the impression that he is
reducing our fiscal imbalances. The fact is, he is not.
He is dramatically increasing our deficit and debt in the
long term. If you look just beyond this five-year budget
window, all the things he's left out explode in cost.
And that's going to put this country in very, very
grave difficulty, given the fact it's right when the baby
boomers begin to retire. It will force very, very deep
and draconian cuts. That's a very important point. Senator Gregg,
are we looking at eternal deficits? Is that really the
message of this budget? No, not at all. What you're
looking at is two different problems here. In the short
term, we can certainly manage the deficit. We can reduce
it by half, which will be an historic low, relative
to the period that, we're over the last 20 years
except for that period when we had surpluses. But the
problem is the demographic situation that occurs in this country,
which is, when the baby boom generation starts to retire
in 2008, the demands of my population, of our generation
here on younger Americans, our children and our grandchildren--for
our retirement benefits, for our health care costs--are going
to be absolutely astronomical. And there simply aren't going to
be enough people working to support the retired generation, because
the retired generation will be so large. That is a
huge issue. The president has been willing to step up
to that issue by taking on the question of how
we reform Social Security. So I think you've got to
give him credit for recognizing that the long-term structural issue,
which is demographically driven--we're all alive, we all exist,
and most of us are going to retire and take
advantage of the retire system--is there, and you've got
to address it. So his stepping out on the issue
of Social Security is a very positive step in the right
direction towards opening the debate on how we address the
long-term deficit. But Senator Gregg, that does raise the question
that none of the Social Security transition costs are even
in this budget projection, even if we phase it in,
as I think he's suggesting--I think it's something like
$750 billion or $780 billion by 2009--where does that
come from? Where does this budget leave the prospects for
the Social Security overhaul being passed this year? Well, Social
Security has about five major moving parts, and if you
address it in a comprehensive way, you'll put it into
balance. And if you put it into balance, you'll save
massive amounts of dollars in the out years--something like
$11 trillion. And part of that is the personal account
approach. Part of it would be changing the bend points,
which is basically means testing. Part of it would be
getting a proper COLA. But you've to do a balanced,
comprehensive approach. But once you do that, yes, you'll have
some short-term increases in costs, because you've got to get
to the corrections in the system that give you the
long-term benefit. But over the long-term, you'll have huge savings
and you'll make the system solvent, which is the key
here for our children and our grandchildren, who are going
to have to pay to support us, and we don't
want to put too much of a tax burden on
them to do that. Senator Conrad, I guess what I'm really asking
is, do you think the Social Security reform is politically
doable this year as the president would like to do,
when at the same time the members of Congress and
the Senate are looking at these deficits? You know, the
president has made it all more difficult, first of all,
by not acknowledging the privatization cost. The 20-year costs are
$4.6 trillion, and he proposes borrowing all of it. That's
not a solution to a problem. Second of all, in
the short-term, the president over the next ten years is
taking over $2.5 trillion of Social Security money and using
it to pay for other things. That just digs the
hole deeper before starting to fill it in. Now, this
is a policy--this is a policy not of reducing
deficits and facing up to problems. This is a budget
plan that hides problems from the American people and hides
the result. The inevitable result will have put us in
a very deep hole and weaken the country's economic strength.
That's a mistake. Senator Conrad and Chairman Gregg, thank you
both. Thank you. Still to come on the NewsHour tonight,
more progress toward peace in the Middle East, preventing medical
errors and why they call it the Super Bowl. Our
Middle East update. Ray Suarez is in charge. Israel's prime
minister, Ariel Sharon, and Mahmoud Abbas, the newly-elected president of
the Palestinian Authority, will declare an end to more than
four years of fighting when they meet tomorrow in Sharm
El Sheikh, Egypt. Officials from both sides said the truce
deal had been worked out in pre-summit talks. That announcement
came as Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice wrapped up her
first official visit to the area. Calling this a "moment
of opportunity," Rice named a U.S. Army general to act
as security coordinator between Palestinians and Israelis. For more on
these developments, we turn to Newsweek's Jerusalem correspondent, Dan Ephron.
Dan, welcome. Does Rice's visit, the new secretary of state,
constitute an active return of the United States to Middle
East diplomacy? Well, I think the Palestinians certainly hope that
it does. And I think it probably does. It's a
bigger sign than anything we've seen, I would say, in
the past 18 months that the Americans are now willing
to engage. If you recall, it was in September of
2003 when this very same Mahmoud Abbas stepped down as
the Palestinian prime minister, and from that stage on, the
Americans really washed their hands of this thing. There have
been no regular envoys. And this is, I think, the
first visit by a secretary of state from the United
States since then. What is Lt. General William Ward, the
new security coordinator, going to do? Well, I think that's
one of the interesting things that has emerged from Secretary
Rice's visit here. In the past, I think for the
most part the United States has sent troubleshooters who deal
with diplomacy, who deal with politics, who go back and
forth between Jerusalem and Ramallah carrying messages and trying to
bridge political issues. In this case, the U.S. has appointed
a security coordinator who will probably remain primarily on the
Palestinian side and help the Palestinians reconstitute their police force.
I think what this says is that the United States
is lining itself more or less up with what Israel
has asked for, which is that this process, at least
in the coming months, be much more security oriented than
political; that is to say, that the first step is
that Palestinians have to get their police force back in
order, and not only come to a ceasefire with these
groups, as apparently they have, but actually move ahead and
start dismantling some of these militant groups. Will Lt. General
Ward be welcomed more by one side than the other?
Was this appointment something that Israelis or Palestinians wanted more
than the other? It's hard to say. I don't think
that the Palestinians will necessarily turn him away or be
unwelcoming. I think it does say that what the Israelis
wanted, the Israelis got. The Israelis have talked all along
throughout this process since Yasser Arafat died that if there
is going to be a resumption of some negotiation or
a return to the road map, to that U.S.-backed peace
plan, that it has to start with security measures. For
the Israelis, that means getting Palestinians to deploy both in
the West Bank and Gaza, to get their police force
back in order, and getting them to fight these groups
that have carried out much of the violence over the
last four years. Mahmoud Abbas, the Palestinian president, has talked
about a ceasefire. He's talked about co-opting these militants. I
think what the Israelis want and what they're hoping this
security coordinator from the United States will help achieve is
actually something further, actually dismantling these groups. Mahmoud Abbas is
still pretty early in his tenure as president of the
PA. Has he really gotten his arms around the security
structure yet? Does he have the clout, the authority to
hold up his end of the ceasefire? Well, I think
those are two separate questions. I don't think he's gotten
himself around the security structure. I think there are changes
he talked about making during his campaign about consolidating, about
renewing. But I think the matter of a mandate is
something else. Mahmoud Abbas ran on a pledge to stop
the intifada, and he was elected by a large majority.
And I think in that respect, many Palestinians, including groups
that are opposed to a ceasefire with Israel--even Hamas,
this Islamic group--I think has some sense that this
is the will of the people, that most Palestinians are
tired of this violence, and that their voice has spoken
in electing Mahmoud Abbas. And I think there's a tendency
anyway to let that go forward for the time being.
That soon to be announced ceasefire has gotten a lot
of the attention, but what else is on the agenda
for Sharm El Sheikh? What else do the two sides
have to talk about? Well, one of the interesting things...
first of all, this has been carefully choreographed. I think
that's in part true because there have been other summits--
certainly many summits between Israelis and Palestinians over the years,
and even other summits during these four and a half
years of violence. I think the two sides wanted to
make sure that when they got there, they had all
their t's crossed and their i's dotted. And I think in
some respects they do. The language of this declaration of
ceasefire has been laid out carefully. But I think another
significant aspect of the summit is the fact that President
Mubarak and King Abdullah of Egypt and Jordan are there,
and they're there with Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, the Israeli
leader, who was really a pariah in the Arab world
for much of the past 20 years. I think in
some respects this is the first time the Arab world,
or part of the Arab world, is giving Ariel Sharon
legitimacy. Why isn't Secretary Rice going to the conference? She's
been in the neighborhood. She's been holding news conferences, been
photographed with heads of government. This would seem to be
the logical next step, no? I think you're right on
the face of things, but I think the United States
has watched this thing happen over the last months, these
contacts between Israelis and Palestinians--really the first substantive contacts
in a very long time--without necessarily being involved. And
I think for the United States, there's some advantage to
letting Israelis and Palestinians work this thing through, inasmuch as
the two sides are sitting down and talking about the
right things. So inasmuch as that has happened over the
last month, I think Secretary Rice and generally the Bush
administration has been happy to let this thing go just
between Israelis and Arabs. I think another issue is that
this is really President Mubarak's show, Egyptian President's Mubarak's show.
And I think there was a sense that if Secretary
Rice was there, or someone else from the administration, that
they would steal the limelight from President Mubarak. Dan Ephron,
from Newsweek Magazine, thanks for being with us. Thank you.
Now, preventing medical errors before they lead to deadly consequences.
Susan Dentzer of our health unit has a look at
how one health care system is dealing with that problem.
The unit's a partnership with the Henry J. Kaiser Family
Foundation. Good morning, Mr. Hilliard. How are you doing? When
Dr. Ross Fletcher visits patients here at the Washington, DC
Veterans' Administration Hospital, he knows he should first cleanse his
hands. A quick rub with an alcohol foam disinfectant can
help prevent the spread of costly bacterial infections. Those kill
tens of thousands of hospital patients every year. Take a
deep breath. Most health care providers know they should follow
the hand-cleansing procedure, but they don't always do it. Fletcher
says the VA decided to change that. When we first
started this program, we noticed that about 40 percent of
the time hand cleansing occurred satisfactorily. More recently it's been
more well into the 80 percent range and we hope
to get it close to 100 percent, so that any
patient requiring hand cleansing will have that happen. What we've
noticed in addition is that using the alcohol foam cleansing
agent, we've been able to further reduce, over just simple
hand washing, the incidence of very serious antibiotic resistant infections.
The VA managed to double the rate of hand cleansing
in the simplest of ways, for example by putting disinfectant
dispensers right here on the walls of patients' rooms. It's
a simple change that saves both money and lives, and
it's just the sort of measure called for five years
ago in this blockbuster report by the Institute of Medicine.
Titled "to err is human," the 1999 report estimated that
avoidable errors in U.S. hospitals were killing 44,000 to 98,000
Americans a year and injuring thousands more. The report said
that was the equivalent of a jumbo jet crashing every
day. One of the report's authors was Dr. Lucian Leape
of the Harvard School of Public Health. The Institute of
Medicine report in 1999 called for a national commitment, a
moon shot, I mean, a serious national effort to reduce
medical errors. We said we could reduce medical errors by
50 percent in five years if we had that kind
of national commitment. But Leape and other safety experts say
that national commitment failed to materialize. There's been a bill
before Congress every year for the last four years to
provide protection, and we just don't seem to be able
to get it passed. Dr. Robert Wachter of the University
of California at San Francisco coauthored a book on patient
safety. Everybody--every doctor, everybody, every nurse, every hospital administrator--
knows we have a terrible problem and they really are
desperate. I mean, just think about if a jumbo jet
was crashing every day what we would be doing to
solve that problem. If there's good news, say these safety
experts, it's that despite the lack of national commitment, some
health systems like the VA are taking steps to solve
problems. Dr. Jonathan Perlin, who heads the VA health system,
acknowledges that was not always the case. It's fair to
say that historically, the VA's reputation was not...was not
perfect and we realized we needed to change and what
we saw was that we needed to improve safety, improve
quality and improve the compassion with which we delivered care.
So to lead its own moon shot against medical errors,
the VA picked this man, physician and former astronaut James
Bagian. Among other things, Bagian had helped to investigate space
shuttle disasters at NASA. He thought aviation and aerospace had
plenty to teach health care. An airmail pilot back in
the thirties had a life expectancy on the job of
three to four years. And it wasn't until the '50s
that aviation really started looking and saying, we can't just
keep building more planes when we crash them. So aviation
developed a so-called systems approach to improving safety. That includes
an emphasis on teamwork and fixed procedures; those prevent airline
crews from making mistakes, or to provide a backstop to
thwart crashes in the event that errors occur. It was
understanding, "we standardize." It's not like everybody has their own
little way they want to fly the plane. We said,
there are certain ways to do it; that we use
checklists for certain things; that, you know, you take away
certain latitudes. Bagian says applying systems thinking to VA health
care started with a similar cultural change. Rather than burying
mistakes or punishing people involved in them, the VA had
to ferret them out. Borrowing another leaf from airline safety,
VA personnel are now required to report any adverse events
through an internal computerized reporting system. They're also required to
report so-called "near-misses" or "close calls"--instances when something dangerous
almost happens to patients but doesn't. Close calls happen anywhere
from ten to 200 times more frequently than the event
they're the precursor of. So you can think of for
every incorrect surgery that's done, there's anywhere from ten to
200 that almost happened. Why not learn from those? Bagian
simulated for us how the reporting system works. Patient almost
had surgery performed on the incorrect leg. VA safety experts
analyze these reports and then launch a so-called root cause
analysis. That's when a small team is assembled to probe
the chain of factors leading up to a given adverse
event. Take the problem Bagian simulated: Operating on the wrong
site of the patient's body. It's surprisingly common throughout U.S.
hospitals, especially when surgery involves a part that the body
has two of, like eyes or kidneys. To avoid wrong-site
surgery, a national hospital oversight body, the Joint Commission for
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, now requires that the correct surgical
site be clearly marked. But Bagian says that when VA
performed root cause analysis, it discovered an even bigger problem.
We found out that 44% of incorrect surgeries--that's what
we call them; we don't call them wrong-sited, because that's
not right--44 percent were left/right foul-ups; 36 percent were
the wrong patient. The reason they did the wrong knee
was they thought I was you. The solution was to
adopt a protocol in which each patient to be operated
on first identifies himself by name, birth date and Social
Security number. William Dreyer. Okay, and your birth date? February
10th, 1947. Okay, and your Social Security number? We watched
the process take place before a real-life surgery at the
Washington, DC Veterans' Medical Center. Bagian says that when these
procedures have been followed at VA, they've drastically reduced wrong-site
or wrong-person surgery. Another change from the past is that
the VA now relies heavily on information technology to thwart
errors, especially those involving medication. Studies suggest those turn up
in roughly one out of every six hospital stays throughout
the U.S. As a result, the VA has shifted to
an almost fully computerized medication system. Physicians first select the
name of the drug they want to prescribe, and the
correct dose, from a computerized menu. That prevents any mistakes
stemming from doctors' often unreadable handwriting. The physician can then
check the prescription against the patient's fully electronic health record
to probe any concerns about allergies or adverse drug interactions.
The VA is the first large health system in the
nation to replace paper charts with this fully electronic record.
The VA spent more than a billion dollars developing the
record, but it now costs just $78 per patient per
year to operate, and Perlin says it produces a huge
safety payoff. If you came for care in VA eight
years ago, the likelihood that your chart would be there
would be 60 percent. Today, it's 100 percent. Once a
prescription order is checked against the electronic health record, it's
routed to the hospital pharmacy, where medication is labeled with
the patient's name and a unique barcode. That's an innovation
dreamed up by a VA nurse, who saw the barcoding
technology in use at a car rental agency and suggested
it could be adapted by the VA. The nurse scans
the barcode on the medication, scans the barcode on the
patient's wrist band, assuring that it's the right medication in
the right dose for the right patient, and virtually eliminating
errors at that point of administration. On the day we
visited the Washington VA, Inpatient Charles Hilliard was getting his
medicine for leukemia. There was two Hilliards on this floor,
so I definitely don't want to get his medicines, and
I imagine he didn't want to get mine either! The
VA now plans to add barcoding technology to lab work
to prevent mixups in which one patient's specimens are confused
with another's. With the exception of the costly step of
converting to electronic health records, most of these changes have
come cheaply. They amount to ten cents for every $100
the VA spends on delivering medical care. A new report
from the Government Accountability Office, Congress's watchdog arm, gives the
VA generally high marks for its safety initiatives. At the
same time, the report urges even broader cultural changes. Among
other things, it said, "Nurses need the confidence to disagree
with physicians when they find an unsafe situation." VA officials
agree and say they've already launched training programs to encourage
nurses to do just that. They say that's just one
way they're aiming for still higher levels of patient safety
and setting a standard for other U.S. health care providers
to follow. And finally tonight, another Super Bowl is history.
Media correspondent Terence Smith looks at this uniquely American spectacle.
First down from the 19--McNabb goes toward the end
zone. This one is picked off. It was that rarity
among Super Bowls--a closely fought game tied after the
first, second and third quarters. Touchdown, Philadelphia! After Philadelphia fell
behind by ten in the fourth, receiver Greg Lewis caught
a touchdown pass with 1:48 left to shave New England's
lead to three. But the Patriots intercepted a Donovan McNabb
pass with seconds to go and earned their third title
in four years, leading many sportswriters to brand the Patriots
the league's new dynasty. The Patriots became one of only
two teams since the 1990s to win three titles in
four seasons. An estimated 86 million people across the United
States watched the televised game according to Neilson Media Research
and as important to some viewers as the contest on
the field, the ads, and the halftime show. Former Beatle
Paul McCartney's halftime performance was deliberately devoid of scandal, unlike
last year's spectacle when Janet Jackson flashed her bare breast--
the now infamous "wardrobe malfunction"--when singer Justin Timberlake tore
open her black leather top. That fleeting moment provoked outrage
from the NFL to the Federal Communications Commission to Congress.
Hey there's some Bud Light. This year, advertisers paid an
average of $2.4 million to air 30-second spots specially produced
for the game. The raciest ad mocked the Janet Jackson
moment by showing an attractive woman suffering a wardrobe malfunction
of her own in a Senate hearing about decency over
the airwaves. But overall, the ads, the halftime show and
the game itself were decidedly family-friendly. More now about the
Patriots and the tone behind this year's Super Bowl. For
that I'm joined by author and sportswriter John Feinstein. He
is at work on a book about the Baltimore Ravens.
John, welcome. Just good, clean fun this year. That's what
the NFL wants. Paul Tagliabue wants a G-rated league, at
least on the surface of it because what he says
is, you know, we were shocked and outraged by the
Janet Jackson moment last year. You remember the Monday night
broadcast that opened with Nicolette Sheridan in a towel in
the Philadelphia Eagles' locker room with Terrell Owens. When people
objected to that Tagliabue again did his Inspector No imitation,
and said I'm shocked to learn that there are towels
in the Philadelphia Eagles' locker room occupied by women. They
go on and on about how they want to be
good, clean fun as you say. But look at any
NFL game on the sidelines; you have cheerleaders wearing almost
nothing. The teams put out calendars with these cheerleaders and
Paul Tagliabue doesn't seem to be too upset about that
because it sells. But for the Super Bowl, for this
huge audience 86 million people different rules apply. After last
year. Different rules apply because what the NFL had done
was the halftimes had gotten a little bit racier each
and every year. One year it was Diana Ross being
picked up by a helicopter and being taken out of
the stadium at halftime. They turned the show over to
MTV. Last year we saw what happened with Justin Timberlake
and Janet Jackson and all the reaction and the FCC
fining CBS hundreds of thousands of dollars for the incident
and then the NFL saying, okay, we're not going to
have that anymore so Paul McCartney is brought in. I'm
sure if he had wanted to sing "Why Don't We
Do it in the Road" that would have been banned
by the NFL from the halftime show. Even the advertisers
were on their best behavior. There was a little raciness
there as we just showed. But that got pulled. That
ad was pulled. It was supposed to air again at
the two-minute warning. The NFL sent word to Fox that
one goes too far. It was pulled. There was an
ad involving Mickey Rooney that was screened before the Super
Bowl in which his bottom was bared for two seconds.
Fox well aware of the FCC big brother looking over
its shoulder as it has done, as it did under
Michael Powell, saying, oh, no, we can't air that. It
wasn't that the advertisers necessarily wanted to tone down. They
had no choice but to tone down. I think you
call it censorship. There's a little suggestion that people, organizations,
networks, the NFL are perhaps having or trying to have
it anyway both ways. Oh, absolutely. They want to have
it both ways. When you go to an NFL stadium,
Terry, you look around. There is a sign for the
foundation of every player on the team. The Terence Smith
Foundation, the John Feinstein Foundation; if you pick up a
media guide it's about all the time these football players
spend away from the field helping kids, helping the needy.
That's the image the NFL portrays. The United Way commercials
that have run for years with the players standing there
going in my free time I go and I help
these people who are in need. That's the image the
NFL wants but they also know, they're smart enough to
know that sex sells. So when they can get away
with it, with cheerleaders rah-rah but we're wearing almost nothing
they do that too. Now, in fact they got a
huge audience, 86 million people, but interestingly that was down
4 percent from a year ago. You wonder if that's
just a blip, if it's a reflection of the fact
that the weather was pretty good on the East Coast
and people were out late in the afternoon. The ratings
go up as the game goes on. Maybe people are
a little tired of the Patriots. You never know with
dynasties. They can go both ways. The Patriots aren't a
sexy dynasty the way the Cowboys were. The cowboys were
rock 'em, sock 'em, they were America's team. They had
the sexy cheerleaders that everybody knew all about because they
were the first ones to have them. They got big
ratings. The Patriots are a very quiet dynasty, embodied in
their coach Bill Belichick who would rather wear a gray
sweat shirt 24/7 throughout the year. Dynasty, what does it
mean? That's today's word. It's a relative word in anything.
In sports, politics, whatever you want to talk about. But
in today's NFL, where you have this salary cap that
makes it very difficult to keep teams together for extended
periods because players become stars and then their salaries go
up and teams have to make a decision, we can
pay this star but we can't pay that star. So
it's very hard to maintain year after year the way
in the old days when players were tied to their
teams forever, you know, the old Green Bay Packers of
Vince Lombardi, most of those guys stayed with the Packers
for their entire careers. It doesn't work that way anymore
in the NFL. So to win three Super Bowls in
four years in today's environment is remarkable and is, quote
unquote, a dynasty. Yet they have figured out how to
do it. What's the key? Well I think the key
for the Patriots--That's what I mean.--is they are
not built around superstars. Their one true superstar, the one
guy on this team who is a lock Hall of
Famer is their quarterback Tom Brady. They took him with
199th pick in the NFL draft in the sixth round.
Not the number one like Peyton Manning of the Colts
or Troy Aikman who was the quarterback for the last
dynasty for the Cowboys. He was the 199th pick. So
there's some luck involved when you get a superstar in
the sixth round but what they have done is they
have built with mid-level free agents, guys who don't make
12, 14, 15 million dollars a year. There's a saying
around the NFL the Washington Redskins win the Super Bowl
every March because they march in all these big money
free agents hold up a jersey gave them the huge
contracts. When they have to put the team on the
field in September it doesn't go so well. The Patriots
don't hold any of those press conferences in March. Their
signings are in agate. They sign so-and-so off of a
team for, you know, for $2 million a year which
in relative terms is a small contract. Then you look
up in January and they're playing and the Redskins are
watching at home along with most other teams. If that's
the formula why couldn't other teams do it? Why don't
other teams do it? Well, other teams are copying it
now because they're seeing how it works. You will see,
you have seen in the last couple of years more
and more teams looking for those mid-level free agents to
fill out around their stars. But it's easier said than
done. You have to have great scouts. The Patriots have
a great front office led by Scott Pioli, a man
who has been with Bill Belichick the coach since the
cradle essentially and who Belichick has kept there. There are
a lot of teams that would like to hire Scott
Pioli as their general manager and Belichick said, no, no,
you're not going anywhere; I'm going to pay you more
but you're staying with me. So that's part of the
secret. The other part is Belichick. The guy learned from
his failures. The smartest people learn from their failures. He
was a failure in Cleveland. He missed the playoffs four
years out of five, he got fired. He learned from
that. John Feinstein, thanks so much. Thank you, Terry. Again,
the other major developments of this day: President Bush sent
a $2.5 trillion budget to Congress. Democratic leaders called it
a hoax. Israel and the Palestinians announced plans for a
formal ceasefire. And at least 28 people died in attacks
across Iraq. We'll see you online and again here tomorrow
evening. I'm Jim Lehrer. Thank you and good night.
