content
Good evening, I'm Margaret Warner. Jim Lehrer is off this
week. On the NewsHour tonight, we'll look at President-elect Bush's
choice for secretary of defense, Paul Solman reports on a
new breed of philanthropists who are changing the rules of
the game, Susan Dentzer offers an update on the risks
of cellular telephones, and Elizabeth Farnsworth gets some historical perspective
on the year 2000 from Michael Beschloss, Haynes Johnson, Richard
Norton Smith and Roger Wilkins. It all follows our summary
of the news this Thursday. President-elect Bush announced his nominee
for defense secretary today. He's Donald Rumsfeld, a former White
House chief of staff who was defense secretary under President
Ford. We'll have more on the Rumsfeld pick right after
the News Summary. The first data from the year 2000
Census, released today, show the U.S. population has jumped more
than 13% since 1990 to more than 281 million people.
The growth has come unevenly--and that will cause a
reallocation in the U.S. House of Representatives. Among the biggest
changes, Arizona, Texas, Georgia and Florida will gain two seats
each, while New York and Pennsylvania will each lose two.
All told, 18 of the 50 states will either gain
or lose representatives. President Clinton raised the federal budget surplus
projection today--to $1.9 trillion over the next decade. That's
$300 billion more than the previous estimate, issued last summer.
The President said the new figures mean the entire $5.6
trillion national debt could be paid off in nine years,
if all of the surplus is used for that purpose.
He spoke at the White House. I have often said
that I believe we should use a portion of the
surplus to make critical investments in education, provide a prescription
drug benefit through Medicare to our seniors and have a
targeted tax cut. If the incoming administration and the new
Congress make such decisions, they could still get us out
of debt early. President-elect Bush has proposed a much bigger
tax cut than Mr. Clinton advocates, some $1.3 trillion over
ten years. Also today, the President said he has decided
not to visit North Korea before leaving office next month.
He said there wasn't enough time to prepare the deal
he sought, under which Pyongyang would agree to stop producing
ballistic missiles. In the Middle East today, a bomb exploded
on a bus in Tel Aviv, injuring 14 people. And
two Israelis were killed in an attack in Gaza. We
have a report from John Irvine of Independent Television News.
Some of the victims of today's upsurge in violence: Israeli
soldiers injured in an ambush that killed two of their
colleagues on the Gaza strip. Earlier, there were bomb explosions
on a bus, as it traveled along one of the
busiest roads in Tel Aviv. Both attacks were probably the
work of Palestinian militants opposed to the peace process, and
the violence was another setback on a day that had
already seen the cancellation of a summit, between the Israeli
and Palestinian leaders. The Israeli prime minister, Ehud Barak, pulled
out of that meeting, deciding it was pointless since the
Palestinians had not given a clear-cut response to American proposals,
meant to be the basis for moving forward. Yasser Arafat,
who's been with the Egyptian President today, says the blueprint
for peace is not detailed enough, and he wants clarification
before accepting or rejecting it outright. President Clinton condemned the
attacks and said they showed the prospects for peace will
not improve with time. He said he's still pursuing an
agreement, but added "There is no point in our talking
further unless both sides accept the parameters I have laid
out." Montgomery Ward said today it was closing its doors
and filing for bankruptcy, after more than a century in
the retailing business. Founded in 1872, the Chicago-based chain grew
to more than 250 stores in 31 states and employed
37,000 people. The company said weak holiday sales made the
decision unavoidable. Montgomery Ward is a subsidiary of General Electric
Company. Record cold and snow continued across the South, Southwest
and Midwest today. 37 deaths are blamed on the storms,
including 22 on Texas highways. Hundreds of thousands of people
remain without power, and more storms are forecast. In Texas,
police and National Guard troops had to rescue about 1,000
motorists stranded overnight by ice and snow on a highway
near Abilene. That's it for the News Summary tonight. Now
it's on to another Bush cabinet choice, giving away money
with a purpose, an update on cellular telephones, and historical
perspectives on the year 2000. A new boss for the
Pentagon. We start with a report from Spencer Michels. Donald
Rumsfeld's appointment as Secretary of Defense is a unprecedented return
engagement. It brings back to government--at the age of
68--a man who began serving in elective and appointed
office in 1963, following a stint as a Navy pilot.
Rumsfeld was elected to the first of four terms in
congress, at the age of 30. Under President Nixon, he
held several jobs, including ambassador to NATO. When Gerald Ford
became President, Rumsfeld became chief of staff, and in 1975
he assumed the job of defense secretary--the youngest in
history. Since leaving government, he worked as a business executive,
most recently as chairman and CEO of General Instrument Corporation,
a television technology firm. In announcing Rumsfeld's appointment, Mr. Bush
outlined his own goals for the nation's defense. One is
to strengthen the bond of trust between the American President
and those who wear our nation's uniform. Secondly is defend
our people and allies against missiles and terror. And thirdly
is to begin creating a military prepared for the dangers
of a new century. We hope to never send our
troops into combat, but if deterrence were to fail, we
must send them fully prepared and equipped for the dangers
that they will face. Secondly, to defend our forces and
allies and our own country from the threat of missile
attack or accidental launch, we must develop a missile defense
system. I was most impressed by the chairman of the
national commission's ballistic missile threats work. That chairman was Don
Rumsfeld. I felt he did an extraordinary job with a
delicate assignment. He brought people together to understand the realities
of the modern world. Our nation is positioned well to
use technologies to redefine the military. And so, one of
Secretary Rumsfeld's first tasks will be to challenge the status
quo inside the Pentagon, to develop a strategy necessary to
have a force equipped for warfare of the 21st century.
Rumsfeld endorsed that blueprint for defense. It is clearly not
a time at the Pentagon for presiding or calibrating modestly.
Rather, we are in a new national security environment. We
do need to be arranged to deal with the new
threats, not the old ones, as you point out, with
information warfare, missile defense, terrorism, defense of our space assets
and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction throughout the
world. History teaches us that weakness is provocative. The task
you have outlined is to fashion deterrence and defense capabilities,
so that our country will be able to successfully contribute
to peace and stability in the world. Mr. Rumsfeld was
asked how seriously he took the threat of a missile
attack. There's no question but that the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and the delivery systems for them is
extensive across the world. There is no question but that
a number of nations are supplying other nations with elements
that they need and assisting them in bypassing the normal
period of years it would take to develop these capabilities.
And I consider that, myself, to be a real threat.
The President elect was asked what priority, in his first
100 days, he would give rebuilding the military. Well, first,
in my budget, I can assure you, there's going to
be a military pay raise greater than the pay raise,
which was enacted a year ago. And secondly, I've always
believed that we're going to have a selling job to
do on Congress as to how to modernize the military.
And that requires, first and foremost, a top-to-bottom--a bottom-to-top
review of what exists today and what the military ought
to look like tomorrow. And that's going to be one
of Don Rumsfeld's first jobs. Mr. Bush was also asked
if, in addition to Mr. Rumsfeld, Colin Powell and Vice
President-elect Cheney would have influence over the Pentagon. One of
the things that's really important for the American people to
understand is, I'll be getting some of the best counsel
possible. And so, you bet, General Powell's a strong figure
and Dick Cheney's no shrinking violet, but neither is Don
Rumsfeld, nor Condi Rice. I view the four as being
able to complement each other. There's going to be disagreements.
I hope there is disagreement, because I know that disagreement
will be based upon solid thought. And what you need
to know is that if there is disagreement, I'll be
prepared to make the decision necessary for the good of
the country. President-elect Bush has several more cabinet nominations to
make--a process he says he hopes he can finish
by the first week in January. For more on the
Rumsfeld choice, we go to: James Woolsey, a former CIA
director and navy undersecretary who served on the missile defense
commission chaired by Rumsfeld; retired General George Joulwan, who was
supreme allied commander of NATO when NATO sent troops into
Bosnia; and John Isaacs, president of the Council for a
Livable World, an arms control advocacy group. Welcome, gentlemen, and
General, what do you make of this choice? I think
it's an excellent choice. I have watched Don Rumsfeld for
many years. He brings great experience, not only in the
business world, but in his experience in NATO and the
Middle East. And I believe he's going to provide management
and leadership to the Pentagon and developing this strategy he
talks about, which I think is absolutely necessary, with the
President and the national security team. I believe Don Rumsfeld
was going to be a key element of that team.
What does the choice tell but Bush's priorities that maybe
we didn't know before? Well, I think he's putting a
very strong priority on the defense and the military. And
Don Rumsfeld's a heavyweight that he's bringing in to this
team and I think he's going to have a seat,
a big seat at this table, and I think that
is very good for soldiers, sailors, airmen and Marines and
also for the country in trying to define this security
strategy for the 21st century, absolutely essential. How do you
see it, John Isaacs? Donald Rumsfeld certainly is a heavyweight,
about you he also is a pretty hard line character.
I mean, he's one of the high priests of national
missile defense, the chairman of the commission that talked about
the missile defense...the threat from rogue nations of missiles.
He opposed the comprehensive test ban treaty that the Senate
voted on in 1999, which was consistent with President-elect Bush,
but he also opposed and testified against the chemical weapons
convention, which the first President Bush actually negotiated and he
opposed START II agreement. So he's been pretty hard line
on arms control. It'll be interesting to see what he
does as secretary of defense. What do you think of
the choice and what do you think it says about
President-elect Bush's priorities? I think it's an excellent choice. I
think Don Rumsfeld is a very talented and successful individual
and I think it says that President-elect Bush is willing
to have strong-willed, able people around him. He is not
one of these people who takes comfort from having yes
men or women around him. These are four remarkable people,
his national security team. The usual perception is that Republican
comes in, that means they're going to beef up defense.
But when you hear that both what he and Donald
Rumsfeld talked about, it sounded like there was also quite
a reform agenda--he talked about changing the Pentagon, changing
the military. Explain what that means to you, Jim Woolsey.
Well, there are changes that need to be made. But
a lot of what you need to do in the
Pentagon when you're not fighting is prepare to fight. And
that's largely the battle of the budget. There are savings
that can be made--a lot of them through I
think base closures and contracting out. But often Congress fights
those because it runs up against constituent interests in various
districts. The problem he's going to face is that, in
addition to improving readiness, which has been run down somewhat
from all of the peacekeeping deployments, and improving personnel and
quality of life for the soldiers, sailors, airmen, Marines, which
is going to cost money because the civilian economy's doing
so well, we're losing pilots in droves, for example, he's
going to need to recapitalize the Pentagon because a lot
of the equipment, the tanks, the ships, the aircraft that
were bought early in the Reagan administration are now coming
up toward the end of some of their useful life.
And we've had kind of a spending holiday on procurement
for the last eight years, and somebody's going to have
to make that up. So I think he's going to
have to spend, even with savings, tens of billions of
dollars a year more on the Pentagon than is now
being spent. We'll still be at an all time low
as with a share of the GNP going to defense,
but in absolute terms, that'll be a substantial increase, and
he's going to have a hard time getting some of
that I think through this very divided Congress. What did
you make, General, of this language about, you know, challenge
the status quo in the Pentagon and modernizing the military?
What do you think Bush and Rumsfeld are really talking
about, and what's the resistance to it? Well, first of
all, I've heard a consistent theme by the President-elect, by
secretary of state, the national security designee and by the
secretary of defense designee, and that is: What is needed
is some sort of clarity of mission. What is it
you want the Pentagon, what do you want the military
to do? And this clarity I think is absolutely essential
as we approach this multitude of threats that we have
in the 21st century, but more important are the opportunities
that we have. How do we work with our allies?
How do we consult not just inform? We have this
opportunity of leadership, and I think Don Rumsfeld and this
team provide a great opportunity to develop those with our
allies and with our partners and our friends and send
a clear message to our adversaries. Which is...Which is
that the United States is going to participate, is going
to provide that leadership and is going to redesign or
adapt our military to meet threats that we face in
the 21st century. And, John Isaacs, how do you read
the language about readapting, challenging the status quo? Well, what
the President talked about and what Rumsfeld talked about is
preparing for the kind of challenges we will face in
the next decade and next decades. But that does not
include building a lot of these what other people call
the legacy weapons, the weapons really were designed to confront
the Soviet Union during the Cold War. And President-elect Bush
talked about skipping generations of weapons, and that could mean
challenging some of the major weapons programs within the Pentagon,
perhaps the joint strike fighter, the F-22 for the Air
Force plane, the F-18/EF for the Navy, and if Rumsfeld
and Bush actually want to tackle this, they're going to
tackle major constituencies in Congress and major bureaucracies in the
Pentagon, and I don't know whether that team and whether
Rumsfeld is strong enough to do that. Do you agree
with that, General, about the constituencies? I mean, somebody's ox
is going to get gored if you're really changing things.
I think you need to set the strategy and that's
the President, has to set that strategy for his national
security team and soon. And then what follows from that
strategy are the procurement items that need to be developed
and the training and the readiness, all of that follows
the strategy. But until you have that clarity, it's very
hard to say what constituencies are going to be...Don’t
build this or don't build that? And that's been part
of our problems that we've had, to me, in the
past. And I think the President and his team early
on need to set that strategy and set those priorities.
What do you make of, one, how extensive a reforming,
revamping job lies ahead; and whether Rumsfeld is well-equipped to
do this, having worked so closely with him on that
mission? I think he's superbly equipped to do it. He's
a good leader, he's firm. He manages by his out
box, not his in box. But he has a very
good sense of humor. Explain that. He manages by...He
sets priorities, he sets deadlines, he imposes, I think, his
structure on an organization. But he is a man who
tolerates disagreement well; he likes to have argument. He has
a very good sense of humor, and that makes things
I think go better. I think the problem is that
the period we're in now is a period in which
the threats are not clear. We may need to deal
with China in the Taiwan Straits, we may need to
deal with North Korea coming in--South Korea and we
may need to deal with Iraq coming against Kuwait again.
The situation is much more to the way it was
say in the '20s or early 1930's after we had
won World War I. That this time we won the Cold
War, but there isn't a single threat. So although we
can hope for clarity in the sense of being precise
about what we're trying to do, we can't really hope
for clarity in picking a single foe and organizing to
defeat him the way we did in the Cold War.
Now, national missile defense, John Isaacs, you mentioned this originally
when we went around and so did the President-elect. Does
this signal to you that Bush is really serious about
pushing this? And what difference can it make if a
Donald Rumsfeld is defense secretary? I don't think there's any
question that the president and his team is committed to
national missile defense. Although that does not necessarily mean that
they are committed to deployment anytime soon. If you listen
to the President-elect's word today, he said, "we're going for
a missile defense system that works." And one thing that's
clear today is that there's no missile defense system that
works. The technology isn't there? The technology is not ready.
Moreover, the Republican Party has a split between those who
want to build the Bill Clinton missile defense system, starting
with land-based deployment in Alaska, and then expand from there
perhaps to missile defense at sea and in space, and
those including I believe Jim Woolsey who say let's junk
the Clinton plan and started all over again and build
an expanded system in sea and in space. And I
don't know where Rumsfeld stands on this, but this is
not going to be an easy decision for the Republican
Party and for this administration. Weigh in on this, Jim
Woolsey. I think we do need to move to a
national missile defense. You mean of the kind that Bush
sketched out? Well, he hasn't been precise yet about exactly
what he was going to do, but I do think
the Clinton administration system was badly conceived. The mid course
system that Clinton proposed really is trying to hit a
bullet with a bullet. It's the hardest way to do
missile defense. I guess what I'm really asking is: What's
your sense of where Donald Rumsfeld is on that? I
don't know. The only thing I'm confident on is that
he'll look at it objectively, hear the best arguments and
make a clear recommendation to the President. I think he'll
be very business like about it. I think he is
committed, as I take it the President-elect is, to having
a national missile defense, but what kind I don't know.
But he would have a real sales job with, for
instance, our European allies, wouldn't he, General Joulwan? Absolutely. But
again, this is the consultation that I talk about not
just informing. The Europeans would call it theater missile defense,
and there is a proposal, an initiative in NATO to
study that. So I think if we have the leadership
here, that this new administration can consult with our allies
on their theater missile defense, as we also talk about
national missile defense, as well. Finally, John Isaacs, how do
you think Rumsfeld will fit into this team? You have
of course Colin Powell, secretary of state, Condi Rice, national
security advisor, Dick Cheney, the 800-pound whatever, former defense secretary.
There was a lot of question about whoever took this
job, would they be overshadowed? What's your sense of Rumsfeld
and his ability to go toe to toe? Well, I
think Rumsfeld is a pretty strong figure, he will be
able to go toe to toe with the team. But
there's a real potential for major divisions within this administration.
When you're force when you force such strong figures, what
you need is a very strong President to make the
decision to choose between the options presented by the different
teams, and this is not President-elect Bush's strongest field, shall
we say mildly. And so if there is a disagreement,
I'm not sure who's going to settle it, unless it's
Condoleezza Rice, the national security advisor elect or select. President-elect
Bush said he hoped there would be disagreements. Do you
see--where do you see the fault lines or do
you see any fault lines in this team potentially. I’m
not sure there will be any continuing fault lines. They'll
disagree on things because they're all smart and people of
forceful will. But the interesting thing is that Colin Powell
and Condi Rice both have a reputation and have explicitly
said they're reluctant to use U.S. troops abroad, more reluctant
than the Clinton administration has proven to be. And often
the secretary of defense is the one who says, "look,
I'm not really sure we want to use force. Here
are the criteria, here is why it could be difficult."
The secretary of defense often is sort of dragged along
in many administrations to using force if you...Whereas it's
usually the secretary of state who's saying, "get in there."
Sometimes that's the case. It'll be interesting to see if
that's what happens here, if so, you may have everybody
being reluctant to use force. It's my hunch that these
people are pragmatic enough that each case is going to
be on its own merits and you'll have a lot
of vigorous discussion among strong-willed people. The president will make
the final decision. Do you see that possibility, general, that
you could have a team of reluctant warriors? Well, I
think just the opposite. I think you're going to get
from both the State Department and Defense Department, particularly with
someone like Colin Powell who understands what conditions you need
before you commit forces, you're going to find someone that's
going to fight diplomatically to get those conditions, to work
with our allies, to make sure you have rules of
engagement, for example, that can work before you commit the
force. So I see a sympathetic ear in the State
Department and a Don Rumsfeld who's very strong that's going
to insist on those conditions before we commit the force.
So I really see not so much argument as much
as complementing one another on the vital issue of when
you commit forces. Can I say something on that? This
is an area with potential major disagreement with our European
allies. The specific test case in the first year is
whether U.S. troops remain in Bosnia and Kosovo. During the
campaign, President-elect Bush talked about getting U.S. Troops out. Well,
the European allies say, "we have 80% of the troops
there--the U.S. should have a major role there, too."
And I don't know where Rumsfeld and Powell and the
whole team are going to come down. So both missile
defense and troops in the former Yugoslavia are major areas
of potential disagreement. I know you want to jump in--
very briefly. Yes, that's where consultation comes in. The Europeans
are building a European force. There's a great opportunity, I
think, it can be a win-win with what we would
like to do in the United States and what our
European allies can do. We need to consult with them.
All right, and we have to leave it there. Thank
you all three very much. Still to come on the
NewsHour tonight, the changing face of philanthropy, a cell phone
update, and some perspective on the year 2000. Business correspondent
Paul Solman of WGBH, Boston, looks at a new breed
of philanthropists. These future leaders are inner city kids attending
a privately run after school program called Citizen School. You
want the skills, you want the leadership, but you think
access to good jobs, good mentors, good high school opportunities...
The citizens, volunteer experts, come in to teach everything from
city planning to law...What kind of files are they?
...Computers to cooking. We've got our bruchetta out of the
oven now. Kids who say they'd otherwise be on the
street, or home watching cartoons, are here after school every
day learning serious skills. New worlds. New worlds. In short,
time-honored social activism. One of those thousands of nonprofit points
of light. But, the people funding this operation, sure don't
sound like typical social activists. It's so hard to grow
a social innovation. Let's put our full profit investor head
on head on. You have to start building your capacity.
Going to scale by spreading your best practices.
I want to incentivize people to do
better. Price wars, competition, marketing strategies, all of that good
stuff. Yes, those women are social activists, but they sound
an awful lot like hardcore businesspeople. Actually, they're both. Kelly
Fitzsimmons and Vanessa Kirsch run an outfit called New Profit
Inc., and are using concepts and cash from the dot-com
revolution to try to revolutionize philanthropy. And if you, like
me, are currently sorting through the ton of plaintiff charity
solicitations that come through the mail slot this time of
year, and not knowing how to choose among them, you,
too, might think a revolution was in order. Imagine if
we were starting a new profit sector, a sector that
was devoted to trying to help social issues and social
problems in our society, but that was using the principles
of a marketplace, and of competition, and of performance and
of rewards and accountability. What we do is we have
opted to produce and create a new type of funding
that we call venture philanthropy. We've taken cues, practices, ideas,
approaches, from venture capital. Venture philanthropy organizations are popping up
nearly everywhere and gave $40 million in grants last year--
only a fraction of the $190 billion charitable giving industry,
but a growing fraction that addresses one of the common
woes of conventional charity. Traditionally, foundations fund small, needy programs
for short periods of time--as Vanessa Kirsch herself found
out, when she ran a small nonprofit that started to
lose its funding, just as it started to take off.
The foundation started saying, "you know, you're too big. You
can't grow so fast," or, "we can't give you money.
You're too successful." And I'm thinking, well, what? How can
you ever grow something if... I mean, what, I'm supposed
to be not successful? New Profit Inc. From that experience,
Kirsch and Fitzsimmons created New Profit, Inc., a foundation that
raises money from a pool of wealthy new donors to
finance a small group of social entrepreneurs who are aching
to expand their programs. New Profit offers sustained funding, a
million dollars or more spread over several years, and provides
hands-on business help, as well. Social entrepreneur Ned Rimer, co-founded
Citizen Schools, where he, too, uses business school skills to
work on his ambitious goal of taking the program nationwide.
I could have described citizen schools as an after school
program in Boston, period. But that's different than what we're
trying to do. We really are trying to change the
way kids grow up in this country. Planning and architecture...
Making change on a national scale. You hear that a
lot in the world of venture philanthropy. You also hear
a lot about measurable results, because that's what the dot-com
donors believe in. More buildings so people could live in
there. Our donors, this new generation, they're not charity, they're
not...it's not about charity; it's about investment. It's just
about investment in the nonprofit sector, and they do expect
results, and they do want to see accountability. Well, it
certainly sounds good, but wait a second. Results in the
for-profit sector are easy enough to measure, in profits. But
how do you measure the results from nonprofit social activism?
Paul, you can measure anything. Robert Kaplan is co-creator of
the balance scorecard, a system that firms like Mobil Oil
have adopted sometimes to considerable advantage. The balance scorecard forces
organizations to clearly define their goals then come up with
a set of measures, the score card, to track progress
in meeting them. One of Mobil's goals for its retail
gas division, was to provide customers with a fast, friendly
experience at the pump. And they put that on the
scorecard, and they measured it, you know, the nature of
the buying experience. And every employee understood that this is
the way the company needed to succeed. And somebody deep
in the organization, in the marketing technology group is thinking,
"can we produce this little device that people can carry
on their key chains," which he calls, you know, a
speed pass, "and they can just go up to the
gasoline pump and it you press it against that, and
it says, "hey, it's Bob Kaplan, charge it to his
credit card." Speed password for Mobil; the scorecard got the
credit. Kaplan realized the balance scorecard might help define goals
and measure results in the nonprofit world, as well. I
mean I get solicitations, as I'm sure you do, from
nonprofits all the time. They keep telling you what they
do. You know, we're going to do this program, we're
going to do this initiative, and I never see on
the solicitation what have they achieved? How do I know
whether they've been successful? What difference have they made in
people's lives? Not anecdotes, but measures. Completely missing. I can
tell you that I was debating somebody, a foundation about
the different models, and they said, "we have 100% success
rate." And I said, "based on what, like how do
you know?" "Well, we gave all the money away." That
was their definition of success. To prove to donors that
their programs make a measurable difference, Fitzsimmons and Kirsch worked
with Kaplan to adapt the balance scorecard. New Profit, Inc.,
and all the groups it funds, must show that their
scores improve year to year or risk losing funding. I
think we'd all really appreciate your feedback. Citizen school's scorecard,
for example, includes improving students' skills, increasing the number of
volunteers. Wasn't that delicious? Another group funded by New Profit
is Jumpstart, which provides tutoring for low-income pre-schoolers. CEO Aaron
Lieberman. There's a lot of research that suggests, for kids
who are prepared when they get to kindergarten, they'll likely
be successful for the rest of their life in terms
of being able to get the most out of school,
go on to high school, college and so forth. Now
you're up here on an individual kid. At a pre-school
outside Boston, we were shown an internet-based program Jumpstart had
created to help teachers update parents about their children's progress.
In a good example of the new market approach, Jumpstart
has now formed a for-profit spin-off company to sell the
program to private schools like this one. It'll be great
for the children and the core members in Jumpstart, and
they'll always be able to use these tools. But we
realize there's also a market for this and we can
sell this to the larger public and create a company
in which Jumpstart is the leading shareholder. It's a true
new profit. Now, all this talk of profits raised another
question: The social entrepreneurs we talked to were bright folks
with glitzy business credentials who could be making much more
money in the for-profit sector. So how much salary should
a person be expected to sacrifice to work for the
public good? Ned Rimer acknowledged the key reward of most
social activists. Psychic income and I think it's huge. It's
being able to see the impact you're having on a
community to me is worth a lot of dollars. But
New Profit co-founder Kelly Fitzsimmons says, that if you want
to attract and keep top people to run productive social
enterprises, you should pay them competitively. I guess the medium
sized nonprofit organization, we should be paying people that are
running those things six-figure salaries. And maybe, you know, in
the lower end of the six figures. When you mean
six figures, you mean $200,000 a year? Or $100,000, $100,000
to $200,000. Fitzsimmons makes $100,000 a year. The social entrepreneurs
she funds for the moment make considerably less. Historically, of
course, donors have been reluctant to give money if they
thought salaries were too high, but that may be changing.
Venture philanthropists after all, have a new model designed to
achieve the loftiest of ambitions. I want to say that
we can end hunger in America, and I don't think
that is impossible. With the kind of money and resources
and intellectual capital we have in America, we should be
able to solve major social problems. Who would argue with
that? Well, Peter Karoff, long time advisor to donors and
philanthropists worries that the ambition behind venture philanthropy has a
downside. Where you make a mistake is where you overstate
and you make statements like, "we're going to completely eliminate
illiteracy in America today," and then five or seven, eight
years from now you haven't done it. And what you've
done again is raise expectations, you've been like the politicians,
beyond the ability to execute. So now, if we look
at it on here, though...But ultimately, the worth of
any social enterprise is the effect it has on people's
lives. So we conducted our own perhaps unbalanced scorecard, a
casual survey on what kids were getting out of Citizen
Schools. If I was to sit here and talk to
you before, say four years ago, I couldn't do it,
couldn't do it because I would just get all extra
shy, I'd be like, "oh, my God." I wouldn't be
able to speak, I wouldn't be able to form a
proper sentence. How does it prepare you for later in
life? We had a stock market/business class where our teacher
showed us how to do stock market. He showed us
how to use it. I was like, "wow, that's easy."
Then he said, "okay, now, everybody's going to have to
take a certain stock and we have to follow it
from now until the end of the semester. So I
took Microsoft. My stock is up to $14,1700 and 53
cents. Microsoft's been taking a beating lately. Are you aware
of that? Yes. It could be down. Microsoft leads to
a last point about venture philanthropy's promise--to bring to
charity, says Robert Kaplan, the dynamic growth of the profit-seeking
sector. Half of the top companies, Microsofts, Intels, Home Depots
have occurred since 1967. You look at the same statistics,
which are the larger social service organizations. In the top
25, maybe one or two has been created since 1967.
And New Profit, Inc., is trying to, through this venture
capital, you know, create the Microsofts and the Intels and
the Cisco Systems of the social sector. In other words,
venture philanthropy is trying to incubate the new superstars of
the nonprofit sector. It's a presumptuous goal, and a major
challenge to how the business of philanthropy currently works. There’s
some new research on whether cell phones pose health risks.
Correspondent Susan Dentzer of our health unit updates the story.
The unit is a partnership with the Henry J. Kaiser
Family Foundation. More than 90 million Americans and at least
half a billion people worldwide, depend on cellular phones to
stay in close touch but as cell phone use has
grown, so have concerns that the radio frequency signals that
carry sound from phone to phone could have harmful health
effects. There have been fears that signals emitted from the
antennas of handheld cell phones could cause brain cancer, or
that the signals could cause genetic damage in human blood.
For example, several high-profile lawsuits have been filed alleging damage
from cell phones. Last summer, a Maryland neurologist asked for
$800 million in damages against Motorola and Verizon, charging that
his cell phone use had caused brain cancer. That case
is now pending. And in a recent book that garnered
media attention, one researcher, Dr. George Carlo, claimed that he
had found evidence linking cell phone use to both brain
cancer and genetic damage to blood cells. But in contrast
to some users' fears, and to concerns raised by Carlo
and a handful of other researchers, two new studies suggest
no statistical link between cell phone use and brain cancer.
The first, published last week in the "Journal of the
American Medical Association," compared a group of 469 men and
women with brain cancer with a slightly smaller group of
people without the disease. 66 of the cancer patients reported
using handheld cellular telephones for an average of just under
three years, as did 76 of the patients who were
well. A statistical analysis showed no connection between brain cancer
and cell phone use, says Joshua Muscat, the lead researcher
in the study. We found that regardless of how frequently
the phones were used per month or how many years
that the phones were used, there wasn't any relationship with
the developments of brain cancer. Not only was there no
apparent link to cancer, there was also no indication that
cancers appeared more often on the side of the head
where patients tended to use the phones--that seemed to
strengthen the case that the phones' radio frequency signals weren't
harmful. Radio frequency waves are low-energy waves. They are not
like x-rays, which have been shown to cause genetic damage.
They don't produce any harmful physiological effects that we know
of. A second, even larger study by researchers at the
National Cancer Institute yielded similar results. In this one, to
be published in January in the "New England Journal of
Medicine," researchers examined the cases of 782 hospitalized patients with
various forms of brain cancer; they compared them to 799
other hospital patients without brain cancer. Of the two groups,
311 of the brain cancer patients had used cellular phones,
versus 359 of those who were cancer-free. Once again, researchers
found no evidence of increased risk of cancer from cell
phone use. Despite the new studies' seemingly good news, even
the researchers who conducted them warned that it was far
too soon to grant cell phone use a completely clean
bill of health. Cell phones have only been around for
a few years and so most people who have used
cell phones have used them on average for about two
or three years. We need to keep in mind that
there might be unknown effects associated with longer usage, and
so that needs to be studied in the future. Meanwhile,
cell phone producers have started to disclose just how much
radiation their phones emit. These are stated in terms of
so-called "SARs," or specific absorption rates, that indicate the number
of watts of radiation the body absorbs for each kilogram
of weight. Although no one really knows what level is
safe, for now the Federal Communications Commission has set a
maximum SAR of 1.6 for cell phones. You can determine
your phone's rating by locating its FCC ID number on
the back, and then looking up the matching SAR on
the FCC Internet page. People worried about cell phone safety
can also take precautions. One is to avoid using a
cellphone inside a building or wherever the signal is weak,
since this requires the phone to emit more radiation. Cell
phone users can also get external antennas for their cars,
or use portable, hands-free headsets like this one with the
phone held as far as possible away from the body.
And some experts say it makes sense for now to
avoid long cell phone chats--at least until more cell
phone safety research produces more definitive results in the future.
Finally tonight, some historical perspective on the year 2000 and
to Elizabeth Farnsworth. We look back at this year with
NewsHour regulars Presidential Historian Michael Beschloss and Journalist and Author
Haynes Johnson. Joining them are Presidential Biographer and Historian Richard
Norton Smith, and Historian Roger Wilkins of George Mason University.
Richard, from a historical point of view, what was significant
about this past year? Well, of course I'm tempted to
answer the election. It was certainly the most memorable event
of the year, although in an odd kind of way,
it wasn't the election so much as what followed the
election. But in fact, we won't know for several years
whether the election of 2000 is the most historically significant
or influential event. One thing we know happened this past
year that will cast a very long shadow for centuries
to come and that was the mapping of the human
genetic code, which, by the way, ultimately will also affect
our politics because, as we get closer to a culture
of man-made man, there are bound to be a host
of ethical, spiritual, moral and, yes, political issues, some of
which could make the current controversy over abortion look relatively
tame. Haynes, do you have another choice for the most
significant event of the year? Well, it's weird because we
haven't precast this at all. We never know what we're
going to say to each other--but that's exactly what
I would say. If you're in Washington, incestuous as it
is, you'd say the election. But I don't think that's
the most important thing. I think we might look back
on this time and say this was the year in
which the boom seemed to end, when the bubble was
in danger of bursting, affecting the long-term economy. But I
think overshadowing that, I agree with Richard, the long-term implications
of this stunning advancement in genetics, which is going to
change everything in life and affect us profoundly in the
future. And, Roger, even though you've lost a wisdom tooth,
do you still have enough wisdom to come up with
an answer to this question? Well, since it almost all
leaked out, I would say that the thing that concerns
me most is the incredible meltdown of the $100 million
Washington football team. Really? But beyond that, I have been
terribly troubled by the renewal of the hostilities in Israel
and the war between the Palestinians and the Israelis. You
know, when I was in high school out there in
Grand Rapids where Richard is, Ralph Bunt was negotiating a
truce between the Palestinians and the Israelis, and we were
thinking that it was going to last forever, that the
U.N. would monitor it, there would be peace. And every
time you seem to touch the peace, you find a
truth, that the haters control the veto button. And every
time you almost get peace, it explodes. And I think
that that tells us something really profound, not just about
the Middle East, but about ourselves as human beings, that
we horde our grievances and occasionally they explode. Michael Beschloss,
what do you say is the most significant event of
the year? Well, you know what? While I'm listening to
all this, Elizabeth, it reminds me of something, which is
that in the 1960s, when John Kennedy suggested that we
Americans land a person--he said a man on the
Moon by 1970, a lot of people said, "you know,
$20 billion to land a man on the Moon, it
was really in many ways a waste of money." But
you know, that was the view that people had from
that perspective. Many people think, and I think it's very
possible, that 500 years from now, we may look back--
it won't be any of us, unfortunately--but people might
look back on the 20th century and say that a
human being on the Moon was the most important thing,
or one of them, that human beings did. But since
we're dealing only with a more limited perspective tonight, I'd
say the election of 2000 in one sense, and that
is that this is the first election since 1928 where,
thank God, we were not electing a President under the
shadow of an international emergency, like the Cold War or
World War II or an economic crisis like the recession
even of 1992, and that's a wonderful thing. But the
downside of that is that it makes presidents less powerful.
We're at the end of the period that Arthur Schlessinger
called, the imperial presidency, and I think as the first
post-imperial president, George W. Bush has his work cut out
for him. Richard, respond to that. And also, what in
the elections can you say now will be most lasting?
What about the process or the way it was covered?
Well, that's a great question, Elizabeth, because I was going
to say the non-story of the year is a wonderful
subtext for the election and the way we covered the
election. Remember Y2K and doomsday? Well, it never happened. What
happened was hype. And hype has infested not only the
popular culture; in many ways, it's also infected the way
we cover our democracy itself. We've known for a long
time that politics has been looked at as a horse
race, that's fine. This year it seems to me was
the first election in which we paid less attention to
the horses than we did to the handicappers, to the
spin doctors and the focus groups and all of the
special pleaders who shouted at each other as if you
test democracy by decibel level. I think that's worrisome. I
think there's a trivialization, I think there's an element of
the media which are interested in conflict over conflict resolution.
And in many ways the legitimate media, the mainstream media,
are beginning to take their message from the fringe. I
mean the NewsHour is a wonderful oasis. My concern is
that the desert is getting bigger. Haynes, when you look
at the elections and all of this past year's politics,
what do you see that's most lasting? Well, I think
that certainly it's true about the media, but that's a
long-term process. It's not new. We have been going through
this cycle after cycle. It does increase. It's serious, and
it's troubling. But I think what this election really told
us was that the system fundamentally wasn't working at the
very grassroots of democracy. Now, it worked in the sense
we talked on this show before, and that we all
got a lesson in what our system is, its strengths,
and the strengths are manifold. But it also--we got
a lesson that there were fundamental ways in which we
don't vote equitably. The more we learn about how the
votes were counted, it's a real challenge on not just
the new administration--on the entire society, to make it
fair. That's the essence of democracy. And that if you
don't believe in it to be fair, then I think
you have a serious long-term problem. Roger Wilkins, your last
remarks made me think that your looking at this past
year is confirming a somewhat not negative but not optimistic
view of human nature. Well, yes, and I saw part
of that in the election. I would say two good
things happened in elections: Mexico got a new president and
got rid of the old party that had been in
power for 70 or 80 years; and Slobodan Milosevic is
halfway off the stage. Both of those are to the
good. But the part of our election that really troubled
me was the dubious integrity of the Supreme Court's jurisprudence.
You go back...it is hard to look at that
five-person majority's judgment and not conclude with Justice Stevens that
one thing is certain, that the integrity of the judicial
process has been hurt here. And I haven't seen a
decision which seemed so devoid of jurisprudential integrity since the
old post-Civil War Supreme Court decisions which tried to slam
blacks back into semi-slavery. So I would say that this
judicial intrusion into the electoral process was deeply troubling. Richard,
before we move off the politics, you want to respond
to that? Well, I certainly respect Roger's viewpoint. I think
the other perspective might be that the court saved the
country from another month of what was rapidly escalating polarization
with the likely same result, two sets of election returns
perhaps going to Washington, having a deeply divided Congress, possibly
even having Al Gore himself cast the deciding vote. I'm
not sure if that would have been much worse. Michael,
before we...actually, I want to move on to foreign
affairs now. You heard what Roger said about the Middle
East. What would you consider most significant in what happened
outside of this country? Well, one thing was last March
we saw for the first time in a millennium, a
democratic transfer of power in Russia to Vladimir Putin, who
was elected to a four-year term as president, which is
a wonderful thing, exactly what many of us Americans had
been dreaming of all through the Cold War. This is
the kind of system that we wanted to see in
Russia. But at the same time, this is a Putin
who's going to be much tougher for a new American
administration than was Boris Yeltsin, someone who wants to make
Russia strong, possibly conceivably an economic rival, military rival, political
rival to the United States. And the result is that
I think we may see that Putin's ascendancy is the
end of this odd period of the last eight or
nine years where Americans were not very interested in foreign
affairs and nor were presidents. And Haynes, what's your choice
for a foreign story? I think the Middle East, as
Roger said earlier. I think it's not that it's a
new story. Obviously, it's thousands of years old. And the
trouble is it keeps sinking in the same morass, and
it never seems...you keep coming up with the hope
that something's going to happen, and it is a testament--
and Roger said it better than I can--to man's
inhumanity to man. We just don't seem to be able
to get it together at the last minute when we
need to, and I think that's the thing that's most
depressing. Russia is a serious question on the world horizon,
if it's falling apart. And I think I'd also add
that China's emergence is going to be looked at in
years to come as a great story. And, Roger, anything
else you want to add about foreign stories? Oh, yeah.
It's that we finally understand how devastating AIDS in Africa
is, and we're looking at the rest of the world
and saying, "can we muster"..."We've got the money, we've
got the technology, can we muster the humanity to help?"
That's the story for last year and the issue for
this coming year. Richard, your foreign story? Well, you know,
it's interesting. Roger mentioned Vicente Fox, whose election in itself
is a real landmark for hemispheric democracy and a cause
for celebration. And if he succeeds, that success will have
real implications for this country, as well. He is just
starting his career on the world stage. Let me pick
as a man of the year a man who is
clearly near the end of his time on the world
stage, and that's the Pope. This year of course was
the holy year in the Catholic Church, highlighted by a
very emotional pilgrimage to the Middle East. This is a
man who, after 22 years on the throne of St.
Peter, clearly a man of diminished strength but undiminished moral
stature, continues really to tower over his contemporaries. And because
he confronted successfully almost every kind of evil that human
kind or technology could conjure up in the old century,
I think he'll continue to be an influence well into
the new one. And Michael, we have very little time
left, but the rest of you, please tell me who
you'd have as your man or woman of the year.
I think you can't do better than the Holy Father.
And George Bush of course was on the cover of
a news magazine named "Time" this past year. The interesting
thing is that this election was so divided--we were
this year, that that was sort of a close call.
And, Roger, man or woman of the year? Oh, I
wouldn't descent from Richard's choice, but if I had to
pick a second one, it would be Tiger Woods. Haynes,
who's your choice? Well, would I add someone we haven't
talked about, Craig Ventner, who was the person who led
the breaking of a genetic code, mapping of the human
life that's going to change us so much. In the
long run, he may be the most influential in the
future. Well, Happy New Year to all of you. Thanks.
Again, the major stories of this Thursday, President-elect Bush nominated
Donald Rumsfeld for defense secretary. And the first data from
the year 2000 Census show the U.S. population has jumped
more than 13% since 1990, to more than 281 million
people. We'll see you online and again here tomorrow evening
with Shields and Brooks, among others. I'm Margaret Warner. Thanks
for being with us. Good night.
