content
Good evening. Leading the news today, businessman Albert Hakim told
the Iran-Contra hearings that he put money aside for Col.
Oliver North's children. The Independent Counsel Lawrence Walsh asked the
committees not to grant immunity to Col. North. New York
Congressman Mario Biaggi and six others were indicted in the
Wedtech investigation. The author of the Sullivan Code governing U.S.
business in South Africa advised American companies to pull out.
We'll have details in our news summary in a moment.
Jim? After the news summary, the testimony of Assistant Secretary
of State Elliott Abrams and Albert Hakim before the Iran-Contra
hearings, with reactions and analysis from Senators Inouye and Rudman,
the Senate Committees' Chairman and Vice Chairman. And a newsmaker
interview about AIDS with World Health Organization official, Dr. Jonathan Mann.
Albert Hakim, the Iranian-born banker for the Iran-Contra operations, testified
today that $200,000 in profits from Iran arms sales was
set aside for Oliver North's children. Hakim managed the Swiss
bank accounts for the arms sales contra supply operation, managed
by Lt. Col. North from the National Security Council. He
said he put aside the money for the university education
of North's children, but did not tell North about it.
I came up with the idea that Ollie had to
be assured and I started out by putting this money
aside as death benefit for him, and I had also
learned through scattered discussions that Ollie was not spending time
at home and he was not attending to his family,
to his kids' education, and so forth. And I had
become emotionally very attached to Ollie--still am, really love
this man--I figured that the interest on $200,000 could
cover a good part of a child's university education. Hakim
also said he was told President Reagan personally approved his
activities. The previous witness, Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams
said he still enjoyed the confidence of Secretary of State
George Schultz. Democratic members of the investigating committees said Abrams
would be forced to resign for misleading the Congress. Jim?
The Iran-Contra Independent Counsel asked the Select Committees today not
to grant immunity to Oliver North. Lawrence Walsh met with
the House and Senate Committee members at lunchtime. Afterward, he
explained his reasons for opposing immunity for the National Security
aide, and key figure in the Iran-Contra affair. Our reasons
for asking for it were, one, that Col. North is
a central figure in the activities that are under investigation.
Second, that there are now many witnesses who have been
giving testimony to his activity. And therefore, it may be
that by the time the Committee is through with the
testimony of Admiral Poindexter, they would not need the additional
testimony of Col. North. The Senate Committee's leader said a
decision on North's immunity will be made within 48 hours.
The Republican Vice Chairman, Senator Warren Rudman, said the committee
could not complete its work without talking to North. North
himself made an appearance in Federal Court in Washington this
afternoon. Inside the courtroom, his attorneys asked that the Independent
Counsel's investigation of him be stopped on grounds that the
law creating the Counsel is unconstitutional. The government of Iraq
is insisting that the USS Stark was inside a war
zone when it was accidentally attacked by one of their
planes. A Pentagon report today said the U.S. has challenged
that claim, saying the navy has numerous fixes showing the
Stark was well outside the war zone. The report said
the Iraqi claim was the principal difference that has persisted
in the joint U.S.-Iraqi investigation of the attack, which cost
the lives of 37 U.S. sailors. A New York Congressman
was indicted today on racketeering charges. Democrat Mario Biaggi was
accused of participating in turning the Wedtech Corporation of New
York into a racketeering enterprise. Wedtech is a government contractor,
already the target of other investigations involving allegations against Attorney
General Edwin Meese, among others. Today's charge alleges Biaggi, his
son and five others used Wedtech as a vehicle for
making illegal payments to public officials. Biaggi and a prosecutor
each talked to the press about today's indictment. These charges
raise serious questions about the way we practice politics and
conduct business in the city, state and nation. I must
emphasize from the outset this investigation is continuing. It has
not been completed, and there is much more that is
still under investigation and much more to go. I will
fight this indictment because I am innocent. I want to
prove that. After months of trying this case in the
media, the prosecution has finally come forth with an indictment.
The prosecutors refused my offer to submit to their lie
detector test, despite the fact that I earlier had passed
one on the key issues which were involved in the
investigation. A U.S. Foreign Service officer has been indicted on
charges of selling false U.S. entry visas to Iranians. The
21-count indictment was announced today in Washington, following the arrest
of the officer, Bernard Fennell, a 19-year State Department veteran.
He allegedly participated in a scheme with six others to
sell the visas while he was the First Secretary and
Counsel at the U.S. Embassy in Madrid, Spain. The Reverend
Leon Sullivan, who devised the code of conduct widely used
by American business in South Africa, called on all U.S.
companies to pull out in nine months. In a Washington
statement, the Philadelphia minister also called on the U.S. Government
to break off diplomatic relations and enact economic embargo of
South Africa. Sullivan said he no longer saw any hope
that his policies would change apartheid. As of May, 1985,
I stated it had been 24 months statutory apartheid was
not ended. There was not a clear commitment of the
vote for blacks equal to whites. I would call on
the companies to leave South Africa and call for an
American embargo. The conditions have not been remotely met, nor
has there been progress in that direction. Canada's political leaders
reached agreement today on a formula to bring French-speaking Quebec
into line with the new Canadian Constitution. The agreement was
reached in an all-night session between Prime Minister Brian Mulroney,
and the Premiers of Canada's ten provinces. Quebec, which has
1/4 of Canada's population, refused to sign the new constitution
six years ago, because it was not recognized as a
distinct society within Canada. The new formula satisfies that demand,
but has been widely criticized and must still be ratified
by federal and provincial parliaments. At one point in the
1970s, Quebec separatists wanted to break away from Canada to
form a separate nation. President Reagan flew off to Italy
today. He will spend five days at a villa outside
Venice, preparing for the Economic Summit, which begins Monday. Mr.
Reagan spoke briefly at a White House departure ceremony, saying
it was time to end trade and monetary imbalances among
the world industrial democracies. He also said they must work
to eliminate inequities in the international trade environment. Some 78,000
farmers, threatened with possible foreclosure, got a reprieve today. In
Bismarck, North Dakota, U.S. District Judge, Bruce Van Sickle, ordered
the Federal Farmers Home Administration to halt proceedings to collect
overdue loans in order to inform farmers of their rights.
The judge ruled recently that the agency had used illegal
notices to inform the borrowers of possible foreclosure proceedings. Andres
Segovia is dead. The world's premier classical guitarist died last
night of heart failure in Madrid, Spain. He was 94
years old. And that's it for the news summary tonight.
Now the testimony of Elliott Abrams and Albert Hakim, Senators
Inouye and Rudman, and the head of the World Health
Organization's AIDS Program. Our special coverage of the Iran-Contra hearings
is where we begin again tonight. The witnesses today were
Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams and businessman Albert Hakim.
The reporter, as usual, is Judy Woodruff. Judy? The morning
session of today's hearings turned into an opportunity for one
member of the committee after another to take shots at
Assistant Secretary Abrams, primarily for his misleading Congress in testimony
last year. But also for what they viewed as his
distancing himself from possibly illegal activities on behalf of the
Nicaraguan Contras. One of the most contentious exchanges came early
in the day, when Republican Senator William Cohen zeroed in
on what he saw as a discrepancy in Abrams' account
of his instructions to retired Army General John Singlaub regarding
Singlaub's solicitation of the governments of Taiwan and South Korea
for aid to the Contras. --to the Tower Board when
they asked you about Singlaub's efforts to solicit funds from
countries No. 3 and 5, you said, "I said, 'I
can't do that. It's just not right. I can't do
that.'" Do you recall that testimony? Mmmm hmmm. The problem
I have with that categorical statement once again, "It's just
not right," is that the implication is that it's some
sort of moral balance going on--what is right and
what is wrong. "It's not right for General Singlaub to
get this nod from me--it's just not right." That
in fact doesn't comport with what all the documents that
were being furnished to you by your direct subordinate, Mr.
Melton, seemed to indicate. What they indicate is that the
timing wasn't right. "Tell Singlaub the timing is wrong. That
he is in danger of jeopardizing this sophisticated strategy that
we have for getting the President's program through the Congress."
Have you read the Mr. Melton's deposition, sir? I've read
all the documents that were submitted to you--Well, senator,
he's been deposed by this committee. He has stated in
full, under oath, his view of all of that, and
I think it's a little bit unfair, frankly. But I
can tell you I've read it, because the committee was
kind enough to make it available to me. I think
you'll find when you read it that Mr. Melton, not
knowing what I testified, under oath, a career foreign service
officer, has a little bit of a different recollection of
it, in which his recollection really is--as was mine--
that we were really saying to General Singlaub--a man
for whom I have and have always had the utmost
respect and admiration--that we were not going to say
to him, "Would you please go away, we're not going
to help you with this," but we were going to
kind of try to let him down easily, because I
was actually sorry that there was nothing that I could
do to help him. But I felt there was nothing
I could do to help him. I think that your
interpretation is not that of Mr. Melton, who was a
career officer who attended all those meetings, and who was
the usual contact with General Singlaub. Then all of those
memos coming to you from Mr. Melton were in error
then? No, sir, they were not all in error. Mr.
Melton said in his depositions that the line in which
he says there was a previous deposition--I didn't say.
Let me move back to the issue of the Miami
Herald, when you complained to Mr. Abramowitz that someone in
his department was leaking information. You commented on this yesterday.
The April 30 Miami Herald piece. The question I have
is did you ever call Oliver North concerning this story?
I don't believe so. Why wouldn't you call Oliver North
after the Secretary had asked you to monitor his activities?
Here was a direct allegation that he was acting in
violation of the law, and you not once called Oliver
North to say, "Is there any truth to this story
in the Miami Herald?" I do not believe--let me
just read you something here if I could. My notes
of September 4, 1985, of a meeting with the Secretary.
One: Monitor Ollie. Two: Report to Secretary on the effectiveness
of the Contras. Three: Diplomatic track--very important. Keep alive.
Four: Economic aid--boom everywhere but Nicaragua. Look at our
economic resources. Get more mileage out of them. A sense
of momentum. Private investment. Economic development. "Monitor Ollie" is one
line in a very large book. It was not what
I was supposed to do first thing every morning. I
did in fact, with respect to illegal activities, as I
testified yesterday, ask him about whether he was doing anything
violative of the law, and I dealt with him pretty
regularly. What concerned me about this was that it was
not the first time that I had read about or
heard about intelligence officers of the department talking to the
press in this way--which they aren't supposed to do.
That was my concern for that morning. "Monitor Ollie" is
not an activity that is to be conducted on a
45-hour a week basis. But if there were rumors being
circulated on a 48-hour-weekly basis about his activities, you didn't
feel compelled at least to determine what exactly he was
doing? I was in pretty regular contact with him. And
for all I know, I did ask him about that.
I have no memory of asking him about that. And
my concern was--first of all, the Secretary did not
say to me, "Monitor your deputies and monitor your ambassadors,"
but that was my real job. Because I'm a State
Department officer. I don't supervise the activities of NSC officials.
And my concern here was what looked to me like
an untoward act by somebody supervised in my building. I
want to tell you that all of this--unfortunate as
it may be--is going to make it very difficult,
it seems to me, to have some kind of cooperation
or understanding or capability in working with the Congress on
driving the policy--if you indeed now are, and still
are, charged primarily with driving the policy on Contra assistance.
Well, I chair the interagency group, and I think I
would characterize it that way. Well, it's more than just
chairing the group, Mr. Secretary. You're going to have to
come on the Hill and work with all the committees
of Congress if the administration's program is going to have
a prayer of a chance. And I detect no effort
for strong bipartisan support. I see where we are hung
up with all of this question about your involvement, everybody
else's involvement, the NSC and the CIA and the State
Department and the policy issues, and we expect blithely to
roll up here in September and ask the Senate and
the House to support a program which has some merit
in my judgment, but is extremely debatable by a great
number of people both in the Congress and outside of
the Congress. Well, Mr. Chairman, let me just say first
of all, we made a decision some months ago not
to go to the Congress until this phase of the
hearings were over and we could assess what information had
come out. A lot of information has come out of
these hearings and out of the depositions connected with it--
which is very new to us, the State Department. But
secondly, I just want to say that while we all
go through this, you're still chairing that committee, I'm still
Assistant Secretary. We're still conducting business, we're still doing the
work not only with respect to this policy, but the
rest of Latin America. Ambassador Habib and I the day
before we started, had a lengthy meeting about his trip,
starting Saturday, his next trip down to Latin America through
Central America to the four democracies, on the question of
keeping the negotiating track going. So the policy still continues
to be implemented while we do this. Well, I can't
speak for you, but I can certainly speak for myself.
Okay? I have a great many reservations about how this
policy is being driven and will be driven in the
next several months. Even though I still support aid to
the Contras, for the lack of better policy, to accomplish
what it is we're trying to do--which is to
keep the communists from getting a foothold in Central America.
But I am not convinced that without broad bipartisan and
public support and support in the Congress that you're going
to be able to accomplish it. What we've done is--
it seems to me--in this whole effort--I'm talking
about the whole ball of wax, now, that we've been
talking about throughout these hearings, is almost destroyed the Contras.
Well, I share that fear, Mr. Chairman. And I hope
it's wrong. Do you think that you personally are in
a position to take a leadership role in rebuilding the
kind of trust--and someone in your position must be
a leader in this effort--between the Congress when it
has been clear before the Foreign Relations Committee, before the
Intelligence Committee, before the American people on national television, that
the wrong impression has been created by you? And that
even the apology which was wrought from you--or wrung
out of you--before the Intelligence Committee was not one
that you felt so strongly about that the minute you
stepped through the door it was so much on your
heart you had to render that apology before the meeting
ever got started? Do you think that you can play
a constructive role in the future to rebuild a relationship
of trust, given what has gone on in the past?
I do, Senator. I think perhaps more importantly the Secretary
does. But I do. And I think that--I cannot
promise you I'll never be misled, and I cannot promise
you I'll never be wrong. I'll be wrong. But the answer
to your question is "yes." I have to say to
you--and I'm sorry to say this--that as one
who feels very strongly that we must begin again from
this point forward to rebuild a bipartisan foreign policy, particularly
in Central America, that we have to rebuild trust so
that the Congress and Executive Branch can work together to
put our Central American policy back together--that I'm afraid
there's too much on the record at this point for
you to be able to effectively play that role. And
I'm sorry to say that. But it's something that I
strongly feel, and I hope you'll ponder it. Well, thank
you, Senator. If you'll give me the privilege of replying--
I'm sorry you feel that way. And I hope that
the briefings that I have given on about 10 occasions
since then to the Intelligence Committee and its staff have
revealed the fact that we are working together and will
continue to work together. And I hope to continue to
work together with Congress. It seems obvious you took your
job very seriously. I suspect you were probably even impressed
with the influence you're supposed to have--would want to
impress Congress and the Secretary of State and the President.
I didn't need to impress the Secretary, he gave me
the job, sir.--with how well you carried out your
duties. You did want to do a good job, didn't
you? Sure. Well, I'm very troubled with the job that
you did. Because you would have us believe that you
just had no idea about private fundraising, about solicitation to
foreign governments for a few million dollars. You had no
idea about how the Contras were operating, or where they
were getting their supplies. You had no idea about a
large number of people who were commuting almost daily between
the United States and your area of surveillance. And yet
these missions went on for months while you were in
office. Now, Mr. Abrams--Well, I'd just take exception to
that. I never said I had no idea about most
of the things you said I said I had no
idea about. Now, I understand that you haven't said you
knew anything about them. You are the only man I
ever saw that takes more pride in not knowing anything
than anybody I ever saw. Most people take pride and
are smug about knowledge. Well, I take exception--You seem
to be very proud of not knowing anything about the
technical problems and the real sticky problems with which you
are involved. Now, I believe you'd have been a lot
better informed if you'd been reading the daily newspapers, listening
to TV, listening to the radio. And I can only
conclude after this that you're either extremely incompetent, or that
you are still as I say, deceiving us with semantics.
Or, three, maybe the administration has intentionally kept you in
the dark on all these matters. So then you can
come down and blatantly mislead us, the Secretary of State
and the American people on all of these issues we've
been discussing. And I am deeply troubled by it and
wonder if you can survive as Assistant Secretary of State.
Well, fortunately, Mr.--balance of my time, Mr. Chairman--if
I can respond to that, Mr. Brooks. Let him talk.
Thank you. Fortunately, I guess I have to say I
don't work for you, I work for George Shultz, and
he seems to be pretty satisfied with the job I've
done for him. That makes me very happy and very
proud. And me. The characterization that you have made of
my testimony here yesterday and previous testimony, I think is
in too many ways to state in a brief answer
erroneous. I wouldn't think as you'd agree with one bit
of it. Now, I just suggest to you that I've
appreciated your testimony. You've been forthright, and you've come forward
here, and I heard your testimony in front of the
Intelligence Committee as well. And I do understand some of
the difficulties between answering everything and just spilling your guts
before the committee or waiting until they ask the appropriate
or right question. And I think there's a lot of
that goes on, and I can't blame you, because of
the loss of information that has occurred from those two
committees--the House and the Senate, the Intelligence Committees over
the last number of years. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. For
whatever reasons--and I don't want to judge those reasons--
you did not ask the questions that you should have
asked about the private network. You looked the other way.
You chose not to be informed about a key element
of policy directly under your jurisdiction. Now, let me try
to conclude. We cannot advance United States interests if public
officials who testify before the Congress resort to legalisms and
word games, claim ignorance about things they either know about,
or should know about, and at critical points tell the
Congress things that are not true. I'm aware--and I
don't need to be reminded--that the performance of the
Congress in all of this is not flawless. I happen
to agree with your observation the other day that this
humanitarian aid program that we've asked you to administer was
simply unworkable. And neither you nor anybody else could administer
it well. But I hope you recognize that the Congress
cannot play its constitutional role if it cannot trust the
testimony of representatives of the President as truthful and fully
informed. I would hope that future witnesses would take the
statement made by Chairman Hamilton very seriously. Because I don't
think we can stand too many days such as this,
listening to testimony which would question great heroes of ours.
I don't know whether to believe you or General Singlaub.
To believe you or Ambassador Tambs. And it's not my
job to decide whether you or the other one is
honest. But someone is not being honest with us. After
all the members had had a chance to say their
piece, Abrams said his. He read a closing statement, not
so much in defense of his actions, but in defense
of his beliefs. The challenge we face is great. A
Soviet effort to achieve domination of the region between the
Panama Canal and Mexico, which would constitute a change in
the fundamental security situation our country has enjoyed since 1789.
Not only would the human rights and democratic gains of
the '80s be lost at unspeakable human costs, but our
ability to defend our neighborhood and to project power in
the world would be irrevocably compromised. I pray we will
be able to put aside our differences and our institutional
biases and act as a great nation to help our
friends and challenge our enemies and protect our freedom and
security now, before the cost is so high that it
is measured not in dollars, but in blood and in
tears. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. This afternoon, the
committees heard from the long-awaited business partner of retired Air
Force General Richard Secord, Iranian-American businessman Albert Hakim. Hakim's testimony
had been postponed for more than a week, because committee
staff said he produced so many new leads for them
to follow up. Fifty-one-year-old Albert Hakim met General Secord in
Iran in the mid-1970s when Secord was head of the
U.S. group advising the Shah's air force. Hakim was cultivating
military contacts as an agent for European and American arms
companies. After Secord retired from the Air Force, he joined
Hakim's firm, Stanford Technology. They handled the sale of U.S.
weapons to Iran. And directed the air resupply to the
Nicaraguan Contras. Secord managed the operations end, while Hakim managed
the money and set up the network of shell companies
and bank accounts used in the operation. In all, fourty-eight
million dollars moved through Hakim's accounts. According to Secord, Hakim
still controls nearly $8 million in profit from the weapons
deals. Before he was questioned by Chief House Counsel John
Nields, Hakim read an opening statement stating his belief that
his involvement in the Iran-Contra network was on behalf of
the President of the United States. I was told that
our Contra activities were being undertaken not only with approval
by, but at the request of, the President of the
United States. We were dealing directly with the White House
staff. Consequently, it never occurred to me as a private
citizen, independently to investigate the legality of the President's policy.
With respect to Iran initiative, the same basic facts are
also true. I intended to profit from my activities and
I never made any pretense about that fact. Moreover, I
had the same assurances regarding the legality of our efforts,
and I was told that the President of the United
States had personally signed an order authorizing our activities. As
a private businessman, and as a naturalized American citizen, devoted
to this country, I considered it an honor to be
called upon by the office of the President of the
United States to render meaningful assistance to my country. Nields
took Hakim through the many Swiss bank accounts that he
had established for the Iran-Contra network. But one account in
particular was set up for personal reasons. Now, the last
account is the button account. It has $200,000 in it,
and your records reflect that amount was put in a
button account on May 20th, 1986. Actually, the complete name
is Belly Button, and this was a name that I
decided to use at a time because we laughed about
a joke and simply took the name and used it
for this set aside. Does it refer to a person?
I--yes, it does. Who? Lt. Col. North. Now, can
you explain the circumstances surrounding the setting up of an
account for Lt. Col. North? I had become extremely fond
of Lt. Col. North--to me, he's an amazing person.
I noticed something this man that--he's got two loves.
One is his country, to a point that in my
mind the biggest satisfaction that can be given to him
if he would enter into an environment that he could
get killed for his country. I sensed that so many
times. The other love that he has is his family.
And especially during the time of the second channel, I
witnessed him being torn apart between these two loves. But
coming back to how this thing came about, I came
up with the idea that Ollie had to be assured,
and started out with putting this money aside as death
benefit for him. And I had also learned through scattered
discussions--it was not that there was one discussion that
this issue was analyzed--I had heard through various remarks--
that Ollie was not spending time at home, and he
was not attending to his family, to his kids' education,
and so forth. And I had become emotionally very attached
to Ollie--still am--and really love this man. Did
you tell Col. North that you'd set this money aside?
I cannot recall having ever told Col. North that I
had set money aside for his family's benefit. But I
do recall my reaction to the times that we were
discussing his family problem, basically for not being able to
attend to his family, and also his concern about the
education of his kids and his concern what would happen
if he should get killed, and so on. The way
I remarked to him was, "Ollie, you are part of
the family. For as long as one of us is
alive, you need not worry about your family. Did you
ever take any steps to get some part of this
money or any other money into his possession for his
children's education? The answer is yes. I consulted Mr. Zucker
and I gave him an Iranian proverb. I told him
I want to do this but the proverb is "if
you want to fix the eyebrow, we don't want to
blind the eye," meaning that I want to find a
proper way of getting this money to his kid without
compromising Ollie's position or his family. The idea that we
came up with was maybe we could arrange for a
part time job for Mrs. North and since we did
not know what the qualifications of Mrs. North were, we
decided maybe if Mrs. Zucker could find someone that could
offer that position to her, and even if she did
not qualify we could make use of the button set
aside to cover her salary. Mr. Zucker told me that
he knew of a real estate developer that he was
going to contact and see if he could find a
way of approaching the problem that way. And that was
the last time that we discussed about this issue, and
to the best of my knowledge, no money was sent
to North's family, and no proper solution was found. Just
so we understand, the idea of this real estate development
company was to have that company pay Mrs. North some
kind of a salary and to have the button account
pay the real estate company. That is correct. Hakim said
as far as he knows, the entire $200,000 set aside
for North's family is still sitting in a bank earning
interest. In other testimony, Hakim said he became involved in
the Iranian-Contra project both because of his love for his
two countries, Iran and the United States, and because of
his desire to make a profit. Hakim returns to the
witness table tomorrow. Robin? On several fronts, this has been
a busier day than normal for the senior members of
the Select Committee. For their perspective on today's events, we
have with us the Chairman and Vice Chairman of the
Senate Committee, Democrat Daniel Inouye of Hawaii and Republican Warren
Rudman of New Hampshire. They join us from the Senate
Gallery. Senator Inouye, what is the significance of Hakim's testimony
about the fund for North's family? Well, it's mind-boggling, to
say the least. If you can imagine the scenario where
a total stranger calls up your wife and says, "My
name is Zucker. I'm representing a person who wants to
remain anonymous. Will you please join me at a law
firm of such-and-such in Philadelphia?" And she goes there. Now
any wife with any sort of relationship with her husband
would first of all discuss this matter with her husband.
And in this case, the husband would know who Mr.
Zucker was. And so to suggest that if this scenario
had been carried out that Col. North wasn't aware of
what was happening is asking for too much. Does this
suggest to you--I don't want to put words or
thoughts in your head--but does it suggest to you
that this investigation has taken a different turn because up
'til now the principals who were officials of the United
States--there's been no suggestion of any monetary gain in
this? Well, in the case of both of us sitting
here, this did not come as a surprise, because we
were made privy to the deposition. But as you pointed
out, it does put a new twist to the whole
thing. It's not a happy one. Senator Rudman, what about
Hakim's statement with which he began his testimony--that he
was told President Reagan had approved--and in one case
signed--an order authorizing these activities. Well, what he referred
to, Robin, was that the President had authorized the sale
of arms to Iran. That's true. Mr. Hakim, I do
not believe, referred to any activities. I see. In the
lunch break, gentlemen, you met with the Independent Counsel Lawrence
Walsh, who asked you not to grant immunity to Col.
North. Are you reluctant to agree with him, Senator Inouye?
Mr. Hakim's testimony this afternoon makes it very clear as
far as I'm concerned that Mr. North must appear before
the committee and testify, because Mr. Hakim has unfortunately placed
a cloud over the Presidency of the United States. He
made it without equivocation suggesting that the President of the
United States was not only aware, but authorized these activities.
And I think we need the testimony of Col. North
to either corroborate or deny this. Robin, let me simply
add that there is no question in my mind--or
really in the mind of any member of either committee
I spoke to today after the meeting with Judge Walsh--
that of course the Congress of the United States must
hear from Oliver North. Oliver North was one of the
people who claims to be close to the President. We
have testimony of his allegations of telling the President certain
things, which frankly I happen to think will be proven
false. But this Congress could not possibly allow these hearings
to conclude without hearing from Oliver North. And in addition
to that, I would say here publicly that with the
disclosures today--and there may be explanations for them--I
still hope that Col. North will come forward like Bud
McFarlane came forward--and testify voluntarily and take his chances.
How long does Mr. Walsh want you to delay granting
immunity--indefinitely or for a further period? I mean, he's
already asked and you've agreed to delay it until a
certain point in June. Well, there's not much more time
to delay if we want to finish these hearings by
the August recess. So it really was basically a request
to indefinitely postpone or to do something. And we'll try
to accommodate him as best we can, but in my
view--I can't speak for the other members of the
committees, I think the chairman agrees with me that Col.
North will be heard in July. Absolutely. I see. Mr.
Rudman--I'm sorry. Senator Inouye, from what you said, and
we quoted you in that excerpt from the hearings, did
you find Mr. Abrams a credible witness? I found Mr.
Abrams to be an important witness with much to say.
But because, for one thing, it shows what the government
of the United States was going through during this period:
deception for one thing, nondisclosure to the Congress of the
United States, keeping information away from the people of the
United States. And I think Secretary Abrams demonstrated in a
very dramatic way how this was being done. And I
think it's an unfortunate chapter, but it had to be
opened. You said you didn't know whom to believe, him
or Ambassador Tambs. Well, we are not prosecutors. If we
were prosecutors, or court, we would decide who to believe.
But in our case, all we do is bring the
facts out. Senator Rudman, what did you mean by the
expression, "Curiosity would kill the cat."? Well, let me simply
say that it is my impression, after listening to this
witness, Mr. Abrams, and others, that they were operating in
kind of a twilight zone, and the way they decided
to protect themselves was to not get terribly curious about
things they didn't have to get curious about. And my
point to him about the Hasenfus shootdown was he was
put in the position of misrepresenting to the American people
and the country and the President and the Secretary of
State, his boss, for about almost three weeks, facts that
were totally untrue. I happen to believe that Secretary Abrams
believed what he said publicly at that time. I think
he was misled. He was lied to, he was deceived,
he was betrayed. But why didn't he push hard and
find out what was going on? We all had our
suspicion. That's what I meant. I said, "Curiosity killed the
cat." And in this case, Mr. Abrams thought himself as
the cat. Senator Inouye, do you think Mr. Abrams is
still misleading the Congress? No, I believe he is telling
us what he believes to be the truth. And as
my colleague pointed out, I think the evidence indicates that
he has been either misled or kept in the dark
in many cases. But the phrase that Brother Rudman used
is most appropriate. Because here you find a situation where
time, valuable time, was being spent to decide and debate
upon whether a wristwatch is a lethal weapon or humanitarian
device. And yet there's no curiosity as to the Miami
Herald article which indicated very clearly that Col. North was
doing something less than legal. And the Hasenfus one was
front page all over the United States. Well, what does
that suggest to you? Well, as Senator Rudman indicated, on
certain things they're not curious. It seems to me again,
Robin, that in those circumstances, Abrams, who is tough, he
is savvy, he is bright, all of us who have
dealt with him have a lot of respect for his
abilities--certainly he was under some obligation if not to
anyone other than himself, as not to simply say, "Well,
I trust my colleagues," but to go in there, close
the door and have it out before he'd go hanging
out there and misrepresenting not just himself but the entire
position of this government. So I really think that is
what I am most critical of and said so. The
Hasenfus incident occurred in his watch in Nicaragua. It did
not happen in Africa or Asia. This is his bailiwick.
Do you share the sentiments of those members of your
committees today who suggested that his credibility to continuing as
Assistant Secretary for future relations with the Congress has been
so impaired that he could not continue in that role?
I would not go that far. I think a person
should be given at least a second chance. Mr. Rudman?
I think Elliott Abrams--and I don't disagree with the
chairman, but I must say that when you have the
chairman of the House Foreign Relations Committee saying what he
said, when you have the Chairman of the Senate Intelligence
Committee making an even stronger statement, you know, whether he
has credibility or not is not the issue. The question
is can he be effective? And I must say that
Elliott will have to decide that for himself. But I
do have some doubts after hearing today's testimony. Finally, gentlemen,
Senator Inouye, at this stage in the investigations what is
the major hole that remains in this story? What do
you not yet understand that you want to know? The
major hole will be filled hopefully by Admiral Poindexter and
Lt. Col. North. And I would add to that probably
Don Regan, possibly some of the other major members of
the Cabinet. As you know, Robin, the committee divided hearings
into two phases. Phase one, mainly to do with the
Contra activity of the NSC. And Phase two, the Iran
arms sale. And of course all of that reflects on
the President's knowledge. And I think we owe it to
the President to get this over as quickly as we
can and get these facts out. Well, if there remains
a hole, Senator Rudman, what is the question that describes
that hole? Or that points to it? In your mind,
what is the outstanding question? Well, obviously, we want to
get all the details on how the Iran arms sale
was put together at the level of the administration. That
is still not on the record very well, although we
have a pretty good idea. But we must get North
and Poindexter publicly to state in the most exquisite detail
of what they did, what they told the President, and
how they briefed the President, so that this President can
either get on with affairs of government or not. And
I happen to think the President--and I have said
consistently--knew nothing of the diversion of profits to the
Contras. But you know, what I think and what the
facts are can only be proven by people to testify.
And it's important we get that testimony. Which of course
is another reason why Judge Walsh--although I understand his
problem--must understand ours as well. I understand that. Thank
you, Senator Rudman, and Senator Inouye. Finally tonight, more about
AIDS. The third annual International Conference on the dreaded disease
is running this week in Washington, and each night we
are covering some aspect of it. Tonight, we have a
newsmaker interview with Dr. Jonathan Mann, Director of the AIDS
Program of the World Health Organization, one of the conference's
main sponsors. Dr. Mann, welcome. Thank you. How many people
in the world have AIDS right now? Well, there have
been a total of over 51,000 cases of AIDS reported
officially to the World Health Organization, from 113 countries around
the world. Now, we know that's an underestimate. The number
that's important to us is the 113. These are the
countries that have come forth with their report, and this
demonstrates the global scope of this problem. A hundred and
thirteen countries. Give me a feel for where they are,
what kind of countries they are. They're distributed all over
the world. Virtually all the countries of South America, Central
America and the Caribbean, of course North America, every country
in Europe, most of the countries in Africa, and several
countries in Asia, including some in the Middle East. Now,
of the 50,000+ cases, where are the majority of them,
is there any breakdown there in terms of parts of
the world? The majority of the cases actually have been
reported from the Americas. And they are the majority from
the United States. But that gets us right to the
point of whether the reported cases are the total of
cases. And that we know is not the case. We
know of at least a dozen countries that have not
yet officially reported cases to the World Health Organization. Why
not? Well, there's--it's a complicated issue. There are a
number of reasons. One reason is that in some cases,
they don't have the diagnostic capability, the laboratory capability, to
confirm the diagnosis. There are still some--Then how do
you know they've got cases they're not reporting? Well, in
some cases, they have the diagnostic capability, they know they
have cases, but there's still some political reluctance to talk
about it. And this is related to the wave of
stigmatization that we've seen around the world. People pointing fingers
and wanting to lay blame, all of which interferes with
the disease control effort. Is there a fear also of
panic among the population about it? Actually, most of the
countries in which AIDS has occurred, in those countries, there
is a discussion at the national level. People are aware
within the country. What we sometimes see, however, is a
reluctance to talk openly to the international press. That sometimes
can be related to tourism, it can be related to
other concerns as well. What kinds of countries are these
that are sitting on this kind of information? They include
countries in different parts of the world. But particularly in
Africa. In Africa, there's been a difficulty we've all experienced.
Because of the early hypotheses about the origins of the
disease and the stigmatization of Africans that has occurred, particularly
in Europe. And this has led to a reaction against
that, and a defensiveness. Fortunately, the World Health Organization has
been able to work with these countries. And we're working
already with 25 countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, helping them build
their own strong national AIDS programs. What do you tell
them? What words do you use to tell the head
of a small country in Africa, "Tell the world that
you got an AIDS problem." What we do is we
say, "Let's work together. Let's collaborate. We know there's a
problem. Let's work together. We don't have a need to
broadcast this in any major way, but what we need
to do is start the work at the national level
that will bring the disease under control." And when that
happens the country then develops confidence, reports cases and that
is accomplished. You've used that expression a couple of times
now--bring the disease under control. What does that mean
at the state the disease is in right now? I
think even though we're facing--we do have a worldwide
epidemic of infection with the AIDS virus--we know what
we need to know to bring the disease under control.
We don't have to wait until there's a vaccine. We
know how it spreads. We know that it spreads because
of specific human behaviors which can be changed, which can
be modified. That's primarily sexual behavior and drug use, correct?
Well, that's true for--that's certainly true, but in addition,
we're talking about blood transfusions that are not yet screened
for safety in the developing world, and we're talking about
the reuse of other needles and syringes other than for
IV drug users in the developing world. And finally, of
course, the spread from mother to child. But it's basically
sexual spread throughout the world. Mother to child has become
a problem in many African nations, is that correct? Yes
it is, because in Africa the sexual spread is predominantly
heterosexual. Obviously, women who are pregnant can also be at
risk of being infected. And in some African cities, 10%
or more of pregnant women are already infected with the
virus. Say that again? Ten percent or more of women
in some African cities are already infected with the virus.
That is a stunning statistic. It is, and in fact,
it translates, unfortunately, into an infant mortality rate due to
AIDS in those counties that is greater than the total
infant mortality rate in the United States from all causes.
Is there any country in the world, Dr. Mann, that
you could cite as a good example of a country
that has recognized the AIDS problem, tackled it and done
something constructive to control it? Actually, there are several. There are
countries in Europe, such as the United Kingdom and Switzerland,
that have done an excellent job of informing their public
broadly about the problem. They've used mail drops, leaflets to
all households, and a variety of ways to inform people.
What do they say? Is it very blunt talk about
it? Is it about sexual behavior? What do they say?
It's as blunt as the society feels it can handle--
which varies from country to country. Sure. Another country that
needs to be cited in a very positive way is
Uganda. Uganda has a major AIDS problem, but it has
been open, and it has been clear both with the
international community and internally. And so they have their "Love
Carefully" campaign, which you hear about all over the country
of Uganda. We don't know yet what impact it's having,
but the openness and frankness must be paying off. Then,
of course, there are other countries like Australia, which has
a very well coordinated national program dealing very aggressively of
course with blood transfusions and educational programs and trying to
deal with that very difficult problem of intravenous drug users.
And are they actually having good results? Are they stopping
the spread of the disease? The best evidence we have
so far--direct evidence--comes from certain populations of gay
men. Gay men in certain cities in the United States
and in Europe, where it appears that the epidemic has
slowed. It has not yet stopped, but it has slowed.
The number of new infections seems to be on the
decline. Unfortunately, some people are still being infected. But this
is the best direct evidence. Now, if we look at
evidence in terms of knowledge--Excuse me. When you find
that--when you find that the disease has leveled off
somewhere, then are you able to go back and find
out why it leveled off? The best evidence we have
is that it's leveled off because of changes of behavior.
Brought on by fear or education--And education. Yes. Fear
by itself, of course, is useless. But education is clearly
the key. And fear can be a strong motivation. You
made a speech yesterday to the conference and you talked
about the third stage of the AIDS epidemic and the
cost and dislocation it's going to have on society. What
did you mean by that? To look at the whole
AIDS problem, we divided it into three phases. Three succeeding
waves of epidemics around the world. The first was the
epidemic of the virus itself, which was a silent epidemic
that began to spread worldwide in the mid to late
1970s. It's still going on, isn't it? Still going on.
We estimate five to ten million people are probably infected
now with the virus. The second epidemic is the epidemic
of the disease AIDS, which comes several years after the
epidemic of infection. Not all the five to ten million
are actually going to come down with AIDS, right? This
is the second stage you're talking about now. That's right.
We don't know what percentage ultimately will develop AIDS, but
we know that between ten and thirty percent will likely
develop AIDS in the next five years. So you have
a first epidemic of infection, then an epidemic of disease.
The third epidemic, which is also a worldwide epidemic, is
the epidemic of social reaction and response--to the economic
costs, social impact, the cultural impact, and the political impact.
Speaking of costs, I was told a few moments ago
that there is a new study out that shows that
by 1991, AIDS worldwide is going to cost $37 billion.
Well, I'm not sure of the source of the study.
And of course there are a lot of assumptions in
that kind of projection. But we're facing a billion dollar
level is clear. That we're facing in the next five
years probably between 500,000 and 3,000,000 new AIDS cases in
the world, coming from people already infected today with the
virus is clear. What that means and what that translates
to goes beyond the health statistics. It gets into the
economic costs, but also into the cultural and social and
political issues that we're seeing all over the world. That
study, by the way, was done by the Rand Corporation.
Are you familiar with that study? Not yet. I'm very
interested to hear it, because it actually blends--coincides rather
well with our own projections and with a statement I
made at the conference yesterday--which is that it will
cost billions of dollars in the next few years to
try to bring this worldwide emergency under control. And the
cost of that to society making a priority decision is
going also to be enormous, which is also your point.
It's very difficult, and in countries where the per capita
annual health budget is less than one dollar, we're talking
here about certain countries in Central Africa, the dilemmas are
extraordinarily acute and they will need help. Dr. Mann, thank
you very much. Again, good luck to you and your
efforts. Again, the major stories this Wednesday, businessman Albert Hakim
told the Iran-Contra committees he set aside $200,000 in profits
from the Iran arms sales for Oliver North's children. Several
Democrats on the committee suggested Assistant Secretary of State Elliott
Abrams might have to step down. Independent Counsel Lawrence Walsh
asked the committees to deny immunity to Col. North. But
on the NewsHour the Chairman and Co-Chairman of the Senate
Committee, Senators Daniel Inouye and Warren Rudman, said they have
to have North's testimony. Good night, Jim. Good night, Robin.
We'll see you tomorrow night. I'm Jim Lehrer. Thank you
and good night.
