content
Good evening. I'm Jim Lehrer. On the NewsHour tonight coverage
of the Salt Lake City Olympics investigation, some perspective on
this year of devastating storms and other natural disasters, a
report on the big layoffs at Boeing in Seattle, and
a conversation about Cambodia with veteran foreign correspondent Henry Kamm.
It all follows our summary of the news this Tuesday.
A special panel began its investigation today of charges bribes
helped Salt Lake City win the 2002 Winter Olympic Games.
The five-member commission was appointed by the U.S. Olympic Committee.
Past and present officials of Salt Lake City's effort acknowledged
they gave International Olympic Committee members gifts. College tuitions were
also paid for some relatives of IOC officials prior to
the site selection. Former Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell heads
the panel, which met today in Washington. He spoke to
reporters after the session. I don't know what the investigation
is going to turn up. I do know what the
allegations are. I do know what all of the press
reports have been, but I don't think that it would
be fair or wise for me or other members of
this commission to at this point assume what the facts
are going to be. We're going to look at it
with an open mind; we're going to be as thorough
as possible; we're going to try to be as fair
as possible; but we're not going to pre-judge it. We’ll
have more on this story right after the News Summary.
There was more bad weather in the Northwest today. Heavy
rains and melting snow triggered floods and mudslides in Oregon
and Washington. Coast Guard boats ferried stranded residents to safety
in Oregon. Flood warnings are up for parts of Washington
State. Forecasters are calling for more rain in the area.
In the Southeast thousands of homes and businesses remained without
power. Virginia's power company said it expects to restore electricity
to all of its customers by tomorrow. We'll review the
year's weather-related disasters later in the program tonight. Overseas today
four foreign tourists were killed in Yemen on the southern
tip of the Arabian peninsula. Government officials said the victims
and twelve other tourists had been taken captive by Islamic
extremists. Security troops stormed the kidnappers' hideout only after they
reportedly began shooting hostages. There were conflicting reports about the
nationalities of those killed. U.S. officials said one American was
seriously wounded. Two Chinese exiles living in the United States
were captured in China and have been sentenced to three
years at forced labor. The Chinese foreign ministry said today
the three slipped into China seven weeks ago, hiding in
a truck coming from Hong Kong. They were sentenced to
the maximum term the police can order without a trial.
Four other government critics received long prison terms in recent
weeks in a crackdown on dissent. In Cambodia today two
senior members of the Communist Khmer Rouge apologized for the
regime of their leader, Pol Pot, in the 1970s. They
asked their countrymen to let bygones be bygones. Both elders
of the Khmer Rouge rebel movement defected to the government
recently. Prime Minister Hun Sen said it might not be
in the national interest to now try them for the
death of some 1.7 million Cambodians in the 70s. One
of the defectors said this: Most of our compatriots understand
that we have much more problem to resolve at present
and in the future, and we have to forget the
past. Author and New York Times Correspondent Henry Kamm covered
the Khmer Rouge and Cambodia for many years. Terence Smith
has a conversation with him later in the program. The
House managers or prosecutors of President Clinton's impeachment trial met
today. The thirteen are Republican members of the House Judiciary
Committee chaired by Congressman Henry Hyde of Illinois. One of
their jobs is to decide how to present impeachment evidence
to the Senate. They're expected to make that formal presentation
next week. At the White House today the President offered
a new initiative to increase penalties against child abusers. The
plan would redefine murder to include the death of a
child caused by a pattern of abuse and increase sentences
for those who commit crimes in the presence of children.
And that's it for the News Summary tonight. Now it's
on to the Salt Lake City Olympics story, the year
of devastating weather, the layoffs at Boeing, and a conversation
about Cambodia. Tom Bearden begins our coverage of the Olympics
story. Salt Lake City realized the fruits of years of
lobbying in June of 1995, when the International Olympic Committee
announced the host city for the 2002 Winter Games. The
International Olympic Committee has decided to award the organization of
the 19th Olympic Winter Games in 2002 to the city
of Salt Lake City. Salt Lake had been a first
ballot winner--beating out Quebec and cities in Sweden and
Switzerland. Jubilant officials and residents celebrated at a huge outdoor
rally. But in the last several weeks charges have been
leveled that Salt Lake City officials bribed Olympic officials to
get the games. Those officials have admitted giving four hundred
thousand dollars in college scholarships to thirteen beneficiaries, including six
relatives of IOC members. Other members received gifts and free
medical services. Four separate investigations are now underway. The IOC
has ordered an inquiry, so has the Ethics Committee of
the Salt Lake Organizing Group. Last week the U.S. Justice
Department began its own review on whether federal tax and
corruption laws were violated. And today, former US Senate Majority
Leader George Mitchell launched an investigation on behalf of the
United States Olympic Committee, He promised a "thorough and prompt"
investigation. I entered this process with a completely open mind
both as to the practices and standards which have been
utilized in the past and those which ought to be
utilized and part of our analysis and basis upon which
our recommendations will be made will necessarily involve looking at
what has happened in the past--what have been--if
any--the standards, written or otherwise--what have been the
actual practices; how have they either complied with or been
in violation of those guidelines. The very purpose of the
commission is to try to get the facts and to
put them in some context for the U.S. Olympic Committee
to try to help make certain that if, in fact,
there were practices in the past which were inappropriate, we
do everything we can to prevent them from occurring in
the future. The various Olympic committees looking into the matter
are scheduled to complete their investigations within the next couple
of months--well before the start of the 2002 winter
games. Now to two journalists who have been covering the
Olympic story: Howard Berkes of National Public Radio, and Christine
Brennan, who's also written two books on the Olympics and
figure skating. Okay, Christine, first of all, let's try to
understand some of the specific charges. College scholarships, these were
given to people who were on the International Olympic Committee.
Now how many people are on the committee, who actually
make these decisions? There are 115 members, and they're from
around the world, some of them are kings and queens
and princes, literally Princess Anne, Prince Albert of Monaco. There
are--I would call it actually the sports world's royal
family. This is about as upper crust as it gets.
And they make these decisions every few years to award
the Olympic Games to a city, winter or summer games.
And these are the people who make these decisions. And
these decisions are made way in advance, are they not?
That's correct. Seven/eight years in advance. For example, in 1988,
Atlanta received the nod from the US Olympic Committee, beating
out Minneapolis. Obviously, Atlanta then had to go at it
for a couple of more years against international competitors and
then in 1990, I believe it was 1990/1991, they received
the nod from the IOC in a secret ballot to
get the Olympics for 1996. Yes. Now, Howard, to you
on the specifics here in Salt Lake City. They are
accused of--the people in Salt Lake City are accused
of, for instance, providing college scholarships to some of these--
to relatives of members of the IOC. What's the nature
of those scholarships? Well, we don't have very many details
about that because the Salt Lake Olympic organizing committee still
has withheld much of the information about this program, but
what we do know is that over a period of
seven years Salt Lake Olympic organizers paid out thousands of
dollars in college scholarships to six relatives of IOC members;
they put them through school--through American University in the
case of the daughter of one IOC member, through several
colleges in Utah. The payments also included living expenses and
books, and other things that were necessary for them to
be in school. Now, there was also a very interesting
story about medical expenses that were provided for members of
the committee. Tell us that story. Well, at least three
people associated with the International Olympic Committee, either IOC members
or their relatives, received as much as $30,000 in free
medical care that was arranged by organizers of the Salt
Lake Olympics. There were--we know specifically of three instances--
again, we don't have the details on that--but in
one case somebody received some cosmetic surgery; in another case
some kind of operation on the knee or the thigh.
And Olympic organizers went to local hospitals and doctors and
said, for the sake of the Olympic bid we want
you to do this for free. And you're talking about
local, you mean in Salt Lake City? Here in Salt
Lake City. And they, in fact, did it? And they
did it. Yes. And they did it. Now, Christine, you've
been covering these Olympic stories for years. Is what Salt
Lake City did unique? I don't think so, and I
think that's one of the key issues here as we
look at this whole thing. I've covered the games since
1984, and really 1984 is the--is the watershed year,
when the Los Angeles Olympics succeeded as they did, and
you had this incredible big birthday party, celebration in the
United States. All of a sudden, after the disasters with
Munich, with the eleven Israeli athletes killed, and then with
Montreal and a deficit I think they're still paying for
now in Montreal, all of a sudden you have cities
falling over themselves wanting the Olympic games. And what happened
and what I've found over the years covering this is
that these kinds of things, perhaps not to this degree,
these kinds of things have been going on for quite
a while. For example, a man in Manchester who ran
the bid for Manchester, England, a bid that did not
succeed in the year 2000, told me and told others,
he said, he even knew the shoe size of the
second daughter of one particular IOC member. What does that
mean? That means they were giving out gifts constantly. You
had situations where IOC members were able to pilot yachts--
38-foot yachts in Sydney Harbour. Obviously, this was well within
the rules, so to speak, of the IOC--$200 gift
limit--but how do you rank priceless in the $200
gift limit area? And I think the reality is that
this has been going on for a long time, Jim.
I think--I don't think that Salt Lake City--while
it is important that we look at Salt Lake City--
they're going to say to a lot of people is
hey, we had to do this, and the IOC members
who were taking the gifts obviously didn't blow the whistle;
they took them. Yes. Howard, the attitude in Salt Lake
City--I was reading about this today and some people
were saying that Salt Lake City is actually a victim,
rather than a perpetrator of this system, is that--how
do you--is that how the people of Salt Lake
City see it? Well, actually, people in Salt Lake City
don't quite see it that way. Some people, of course,
here see that, as Christine described, that Salt Lake Olympic
organizers had to do what other bid cities have done
to win the games. Others, though, see it as Salt
Lake City taking the low road, and violating not only
the regulations of the International Olympic Committee that were in
effect at the time but possibly the law in order
to secure the games. What's important, though, at this moment
is that the International Olympic Committee and the US Olympic
Committee both have essentially said this is not Salt Lake
City's fault; the fault does lie within the members of
the International Olympic Committee who took it upon themselves to
extract these kinds of gifts, to encourage them over the
years, to seek them out. And it's quite clear that
the International Olympic Committee and the US Olympic Committee puts
the blame there and that the action that they will
take will be focused on the members of the International
Olympic Committee and establishing rules that will prevent this kind
of thing in the future from that standpoint. There doesn't
seem to be anyone interested in punishing Salt Lake City.
Yes. Christine, it would seem then that it would be
very easy to solve this problem if the people who
are taking the--whether they're bribes or favors--whatever they
are--just refuse to take them and discourage them, the
thing is over. Absolutely. And obviously the IOC has to
police itself, or at least that's what you would hope,
but they haven't. And, in fact, they've been having their
hands out saying give me more, give me more--golf
at Augusta National from the Atlanta people--again a legal
gift in that sense. I think what's going to have
to happen--What were you talking about there, the Augusta--
the people who on the IOC who were allowed to
play golf at the--At Augusta National--five members of
the IOC went and played golf at Augusta National, the
site of the masters, one of the hallowed grounds of
golf, as part of Atlanta's bid. At the time, Atlanta
was hoping that golf would be part of the Olympics,
and one of the reasons they allowed this to happen
is while they had to see the site, after all,
make sure all eighteen greens were up to Olympic standards.
Of course, golf was not in the Olympics. What kind
of perk is that? This again was legal. Atlanta was
doing nothing wrong, but I think the point that needs
to be made here is that Salt Lake City obviously,
if alleged--what is alleged is true--Salt Lake City
may have gone farther, but when you look at some
of the things the IOC was expecting, was wanting, I
would point my finger right at the IOC members, as
a journalist looking at this, and ask them the question,
why didn't you say, hey, we're getting this, we shouldn't
be getting this, and my sense of it is that
they cannot police themselves, but what we will see down
the road is a commission, perhaps ten, fifteen members, international--
an international body of people outside of the Olympic world
watching this very closely. What have the IOC members said,
themselves, about all of this, other than to appoint the
Mitchell Commission and other than that--and other things like
that--what have they said and done? Well, the individual
members of the IOC, some of whom have been accused,
deny the accusations. They're not saying much at all. The
International Olympic Committee, the executive board of the International Olympic
Committee, particularly Mark Hodler, who's the second most senior member
of the IOC, Juan Antonio Samaranch, the president of the
IOC, and Dick Pound, a vice president who's considered the
heir apparent to Juan Antonio Samaranch, they all have spoken
out. They generally have certainly condemned this kind of activity.
They have launched their own investigation. What they're interested in
doing it appears is taking away from the general membership
of the IOC those 115 members, the ability to choose
Olympic cities. They have talked about a process by which
that would be--the Olympic cities would be chosen by
the 11-member executive board. Juan Antonio Samaranch has tried this
before and the IOC has voted it down. This may
be the opportunity, though, with all the attention that is
now focused on this scandal for the IOC to finally
do this. And it may be a way certainly of
controlling corruption; it may also be a way of consolidating
power within the International Olympic Committee. It's a wieldy body
with 115 people from all over the world who come
from all kinds of cultures and who have different kinds
of expectations, and in some cultures, the kind of favors
that--exchange of favors that took place here is probably
not inappropriate at all. And not considered bribes. They're not
considered bribery. Part of the way that business is done
on an international level. I should point out that the
Justice Department is investigating. Sure. And there are federal laws
that do forbid this kind of activity; whether this particular
activity fits under those laws, that's what the Justice Department
is figuring out. But there are federal laws that prohibit
this kind of thing. Christine, what about the idea of
removing the decision making on where these games are from
that big--the big committee--and that might solve the
problem? I think that's a great idea, and obviously it
would also mean that the incredible dollar amounts--the estimated
thirty million dollars by the five or six cities going
for the 2000 Olympics. Thirty million dollars? Just to try
to win the bid that city, Sydney, Australia, eventually won--
$30 million--think where that money could go if they
weren't busy wining and dining the IOC members and of
course also building stadiums and beginning the process, but I
think that's a great idea. The fact is that do
all of these IOC members all have to go to
all these cities and get the expensive hotel suites and
go and play golf or do whatever they do, do
they all have to do this? It seems again like
it was Christmas morning every day of the year for
the International Olympic Committee and from the standpoint of this
opens the door and has us all look at it
a little bit closer, journalists, as well as obviously some
of the investigating bodies, that's probably a good thing. And
as they say about this time of the year, Christmas
may now be over. I think it is officially over
for the International Olympic Committee. Christine, Howard, thank you both
very much. Thank you, Jim. This bad year in weather
and to Phil Ponce. Mother Nature wreaked havoc across the
globe in 1998. Many experts call it one of the
worst years ever for weather disasters. Early this spring in
Indonesia and Malaysia, severe drought and dry, thinning rainforests caused
wildfires to spread. Hundreds of thousands of acres of forests
were blackened by the blaze and smoke covered the countryside,
prompting thousands of people to seek treatment for respiratory infections.
In Western India last June a cyclone swept a half
dozen villages in the western state of Gujarat into the
sea. More than a thousand people were killed. Winds up
to 65 miles per hour destroyed homes and cut communication
lines. A month later, a massive tidal wave in Papua
New Guinea killed at least two thousand people. A 23-foot
wall of water crashed into what used to be a
string of fishing villages in this Pacific nation. In August,
flooding on China's Yangtze River killed over three thousand people,
left fourteen million homeless, and devastated at least twelve million
acres of farmland. The price tag for China's worst flooding
in more than forty years is estimated at thirty billion
dollars. According to the World Watch Institute, that made it
the costliest disaster of 1998. But there was more flood
damage to come. Within weeks in Bangladesh, the rising Jamuna
River caused the worst flood in that area's history. For
two months two-thirds of Bangladesh was underwater; thirty million people
were forced to leave their homes. And this year, hurricanes
devastated countries in the Caribbean and Central America. Hurricane Georges'
high winds and torrential rains left a path of destruction
as it moved through both rich and poor areas of
the Caribbean, including St. Kitts & Nevis, Anguilla, Puerto Rico,
Dominican Republic, Haiti, and Cuba's eastern coast. It moved north
through the Florida Keys. But Hurricane Mitch was even bigger,
the most destructive natural disaster in Central America's modern history.
For five days torrential rains, flooding, and mudslides caused extensive
damage in Honduras, Nicaragua, El Salvador, Guatemala, and Mexico. Nearly
two million people were left homeless. In Honduras, officials said
the economy had been set back 25 years. Closer to
home, Canada and New England suffered from the worst ice
storm on record. The freezing rain and severe cold caused
at least thirty deaths and left close to one million
people without electricity. The cost for the damage reached more
than three billion dollars. Florida suffered when it was hit
with the deadliest round of tornadoes in history. Winds up
to 260 miles per hour battered the central part of
the state. At least 39 people were killed and hundreds
injured. Neighborhoods and shopping centers were turned to rubble. Then
last summer, with temperatures of more than 100 degrees, three
separate forest fires burned out of control in Florida for
weeks. Three hundred and fifty homes and businesses were destroyed,
an estimated 500,000 acres burned. Thirty thousand people were forced
to evacuate their homes. In September, Hurricane Bonnie, the first
hurricane of the season, damaged the Florida Keys before it
hit North Carolina, with 115 mile per hour winds. And
Mother Nature made her presence known through the holiday as
a pre-Christmas Eve ice storm froze the Southeast United States.
Virginia was especially hard hit. Today more than 50,000 Virginia
residents are still without heat or electricity. And in the
Northwest driving rain and melting snow resulted in massive flooding
and mudslides in Oregon and Washington State. It's the worst
flooding in the region since 1996. Joining me now are
Janet Abramovitz, senior researcher at the Worldwatch Institute, an environmental
research organization; Bob Watson, director of the Environment Department at
the World Bank; and John Clizbe, vice president of disaster
services at the American Red Cross. Welcome all. Ms. Abramovitz,
give us the big picture, in historical context, just how
bad a year was it? 1998 was a record-setting year
for economic losses from weather-related disasters. Storms, floods, fires, and
droughts caused at least $89 billion in damage worldwide this
year. And to put that into some perspective, that exceeds
the total for the entire decade of the 1980s. And
it's far higher than the last record-setting year, which was
only two years ago in 1996. And as far as
the--some of the disasters worldwide that come to mind,
which ones, in your opinion, were particularly significant? Well, I
think the lead-in story covered quite a lot of them.
Hurricane Mitch, the Yangtze River floods, flooding in Bangladesh, the
cyclones and floods in India, but it--this year, no
region was untouched. We also saw earlier in the year
massive forest fires in the wet tropical forests which had
never burned before--the fires in Indonesia, the fires in
Brazil, and Mexico. There have been so many of these
natural events this year that each one--we almost forget
about the last one because we're now--we're moving on
to deal with each and every one. So it's been
a record-setting year for economic losses and, of course, the
human devastation can't be underestimated either. Mr. Clizbe, in the
United States, what kind of a year was it in
historical terms? Well, unfortunately, it's a record-setting year in the
United States too. For the American Red Cross it was
easily our most demanding and literally our most expensive year
in our 117-year history, including a period of time, a
six-week stretch or so, in September or October or whatever
we're dealing with, more large scale disasters simultaneously than we
had ever faced in our history at the same time.
And when you say most expensive, was there one disaster
that was particularly costly? Certainly. Hurricane Georges in Puerto Rico--
particular the Puerto Rico portion of Hurricane Georges was the
most expensive disaster in American Red Cross history. And why
was it so expensive? Well, it was a very devastating
storm; it really hit Puerto Rico hard, and most of
the island was hit, and much of the inner part
of the island, up in the mountains and the communities
that sort of slid down the side of the mountains,
much like what we saw with Hurricane Mitch in Honduras
and Nicaragua, very similar kinds of things happened in Puerto
Rico. Mr. Watson, why was all this happening? Well, this
year was clearly the hottest year on record, and the
question is: Are these just natural events that occur every
so often, or is it possible that we humans are
slowly but surely changing the Earth's climate, and by changing
the Earth's climate, we are seeing more of these very
extreme events? And there was a lot of talk this
year, obviously, about El Niño. I mean, at some point
people seemed El Niño'd out. But a way to connect the
dots, using that? Well, the El Niño that we saw
at the end of last year and the beginning of
this year, it was clearly the most major El Niño
of the last 150 years. It caused the massive floods
in Peru, the droughts in Indonesia, but when--by the
time we got to the very large floods in China
and Bangladesh, they were not due to the El Niño
event. What happened was we got some very, very unusual
events where in parts of the Yangtze River we had
seventy inches of rain in June and July, where you
normally only get about ten or twelve. Bangladesh, two-thirds of
Bangladesh was swamped. In a typical day one was getting
five to ten inches of rain. And so we know
that if you get a warmer world, there will be
more very, very heavy precipitation events around the world, therefore,
more floods and more droughts. And so one of the
challenges is to find out if, indeed, we are changing
the atmospheric composition, greenhouse gas, will it lead to more
El Niño events, and, if so, we'll see more of
these drastic floods, drastic droughts, forest fires, et cetera, throughout
the world, unfortunately. And just a very quick reminder of
what El Niño was--it's the warming that happens occasionally
in the Pacific that warms the air and can cause
extremes in weather. That's right. It's the ocean off of
Peru and Ecuador warms up--last year, it was as
much as five degrees warmer than normal. And when that
happens, you change all the precipitation patterns around the world,
and especially in the tropics and subtropics. So, areas that
have gotten normally fairly dry become very, very dry. Peru
became extremely wet. And so what you see is very,
very drastic changes in precipitation events, as well as temperature.
And without making this a debate about global warming, what
is the latest evidence on that? Well, there's no question--
we are changing the atmospheric composition of greenhouse gases--there's
no doubt that the Earth's surface temperature is warming. This
year is probably the warmest year on record. Last year
was the previous warmest, and so the question is, the
bulk of scientists do believe that we humans are slowly
but surely changing the Earth's climate, and this could have
profound effects on agricultural productivity, sea level rise, and on
natural ecological systems. Ms. Abramovitz, going back to the events
of this year, the weather was the natural event, but
were there things that humans did that sort of exacerbated
things? Yes, absolutely. I think we can see the hands
of man in many of these disasters. Hurricane Mitch, for
example, hit a region that was ecologically and socially very
vulnerable. Honduras, for example, has lost two-thirds of its forest
cover, including much of the forest cover in the Tegucigalpa
watershed, and Central America has some of the highest rates
of deforestation in the world, likewise in the Yangtze River
Basin; 85 percent of the forests have been lost, the
lakes, the wetlands have been lost, and the rivers heavily
dammed, and what happens is that without tree cover to
hold the soil in place, when the rains come, they
can't be absorbed into the land, and they go racing
across the land, carrying mud and debris with it, filling
up the rivers, gaining force as they go downstream, particularly
when rivers are constricted, as many of the rivers in
the world now are, and you have these sorts of
events. On top of that, people are also settling in
vulnerable areas, in coastal areas, in river flood plains, on
steep hillsides, and so more people are in harm's way,
and there's more harm to be done because of land
use changes that have made the planet less resilient to
withstanding these kinds of natural disasters. So, we've turned what
would otherwise be a natural disaster into something--I mean,
Mitch would have been horrible notwithstanding any of those things
that you described. Absolutely. Absolutely. But when you have a
foot or two of rain every day, it's going to
be a bad situation. But if you have bare hillsides
and people living on bare hillsides, it's going to be
a decidedly unnatural disaster. And I think we're in for
more of these sorts of things in the future if
we continue down the same path. Now, luckily, some governments
have begun to recognize this. The Chinese government early in
the Yangtze River flood said, no, this is a completely
natural disaster. Later, they changed their story, and--and admitted,
in fact, that it did have a large measure to
do with deforestation, and then enacted a logging ban and
have begun reforestation efforts. Mr. Clizby, in this country have
people learned some lessons from what happened? Some. But probably
not enough. The American people have, bless their hearts, have
a propensity for living in disaster-prone areas. For example--Well,
about forty million people in the United States live in
high-risk disaster areas, in earthquake-prone areas along the Southeastern coasts
that are hurricane prone, so we're very vulnerable, and that
certainly showed itself this year. Many, not all, but many
of the significant disasters that happened this year were, in
fact, in areas that are disaster-prone, and we know it.
Would you put the flooding that took place in Texas--
Del Rio area in that category? Well, I think that
was a surprise, I think, to many of the people
in Texas. But Texas experienced severe floods this year, and
I think in Del Rio felt that they were living
in a safe area. It was a torrential rain and
a flash flood that just caused unspeakable devastation very, very
suddenly, but I think certainly--I think something like 80%
of the population of Florida lives within twenty miles of
a coast, so certainly Floridians are in vulnerable locations; all
along the southeastern part of the United States, there's vulnerability.
On the other hand, I think people are learning--in
the United States there are decreasing numbers of deaths with
disasters, and I think it's because we are getting better
at mitigating to some degree; people are learning some lessons;
and the Red Cross has found one of the things
we've learned is we need to start working with communities
and families to help them prepare so that they can
head off some disasters better. Now, you actually make visits
to places where disasters happen. What are the images that
will stay with you from this year? What things come
to mind? I think for all the statistics, I think
what really strikes me increasingly is that every disaster is
a personal disaster for a family or individual. If it's
a single family in the middle of Kansas with a
tornado or homes sliding off a side of a hill
in Puerto Rico or whatever, it really boils down to
people being hurt. And I think the emotional devastation, the
emotional toll is often as great as the physical toll,
and I can vividly picture--in Spencer, South Dakota, two
things strike me: one, a community totally wiped out as
if the tornado decided to come down to hit that
six- or seven-square block area and then lift off the
ground again. And at the same time, I remember seeing
two men sitting on a pile of rubble with their
arms around each other, obviously suffering with what they've gone
through. Del Rio, that you mentioned, I can remember seeing
the families that were impacted by what had been--what
had just suddenly come upon them in a very unpredictable
kind of way, or the families in Florida, and Alabama
and Georgia, that went through the tornadoes that were there.
I think it's--sometimes I think we can get preoccupied--
I can get preoccupied with sort of the numbers and
the scales and the scope and--it's been a major
challenge for us and the Red Cross, but I think
what strikes us we have to keep getting better and
better at working and serving individual families and people. Mr.
Watson, how about in parts of the world where the
resources might not exist that exist in the United States,
is there--if there is a will, are there the
means to sort of make better--build better buildings, build
communities out of harm's way? Our challenge now is to
help prepare developing countries for these natural disasters. Too often
we respond to a natural disaster. But we're making major
progress in how to predict hurricanes. That's why we don't
see the loss of life in the U.S. We have
to use that same technology in developing countries. But even
more with El Niño, we can now forecast six to
nine months in advance when we're going to see an
El Niño. So we can help to reduce the human
devastation. If it's going to be drier in some areas,
we can help the farmers decide what plants to crop.
If it's going to be drier, we can work with
the water resource managers, so we don't see these massive
hunger and famine events that we're seeing. If it's going
to become very wet, we are going to work with
the farmers, work with the water managers. In addition, we
can also work with the infrastructure, better roads, better bridges,
to reduce this threat, so I believe science is moving
us in a direction where while we cannot avoid the
disaster, we can be better prepared, we can reduce some
of the human misery, and some of the economic costs,
and the World Bank is working with many of our
client countries, and we want to be there before the
event, rather than after the event. And at this point,
very quickly, the ability to predict? As I say, hurricanes
we can predict very well now. We have to use
that same technology for other countries, such as Bangladesh, India,
China, and we can predict the El Niño event, which
is precipitation, mainly changes, drier or wetter, probably six to
nine months in advance. Well, that's all the time we
have. I thank you all very much. Still to come
on the NewsHour tonight, the layoffs at Boeing and a
conversation about Cambodia. Rod Minott of KCTS-Seattle reports the Boeing
story. In early December, Boeing made the stunning announcement that
it would eliminate 48,000 jobs over the next two years.
That's twenty thousand more than what the company had said
it would cut last summer. The loss of jobs will
reduce Boeing's work force by twenty percent. Workers coming off
the day shift at the 737 plant near Seattle blamed
senior management for causing the layoffs. They're supposed to be
getting six figures a year. They're supposed to be planning
ahead fifteen years. What the hell did they do? So
who gets to keep their job? The guys at the
top get to keep their jobs, the guys at the
bottom, we go out. Machinist Anthony Carson said the news
hit workers hard. Morale is like--it's kind of--it's
very low at this point--it's very low, because you
don't know if you're going to have your job the
next day so your clarity is gone, so it's kind
of tricky at this point because people are trying to
base things off a day-to-day life and that's kind of
hard to do when you have a house payment and
have a car payment. Boeing management blames the layoffs on
the economic crisis in Asia. Alan Mulally heads the commercial
airplane division. Approximately 25, 28 percent of our total airplane
production output goes to Asia, and so the concern that
we have, of course, is that our production looks very
solid for 1999, but this worsening situation of the economies
in Asia will decrease the need for new airplanes, especially
in the year 2000 and 2001. The economic turmoil has
caused many Asian airlines to cancel or delay plane orders
from Boeing. Jin Cho is with Asiana, a South Korean
airline that recently cut back its Boeing 747 flights from
Seattle to Seoul. Yes, we have been cutting back on
flight schedules because we sold off a couple of planes
to reduce the, I think, short-term debt to make our
accounting book a little better. Most of the production cuts
will hit the 747 jumbo jet, Boeing's most profitable plane.
The company plans to reduce production from about three 747
planes a month to two at the end of next
year. Manufacturing could drop as low as one 747 every
month in the year 2000 if market conditions worsen. Airline
industry analysts say both Boeing managers and the Asian crisis
are to blame for the company's woes. Some also cite
fierce competition with AirBus, the European consortium that also manufacturers
commercial jets. According to University of Washington economist Charles Hill,
aggressive rivalry with AirBus led Boeing to seek record sales
at unprofitable prices. They have this notion that they have
a God-given sixty percent of the market and they were
going to get that sixty percent of the market, whatever
it took, and if that took deep discounts on the
prices of planes, they were going to do it, if
that took accelerated deliveries, they were going to do it.
The aggressive marketing paid off. Boeing doubled its production within
the last two years. But Hill says the company wasn't
equipped to handle it all. Some customers complained of delayed
deliveries and even poor workmanship on jets. So they basically
met their delivery schedule by hiring far more people than
they historically would have done, but as a result of
aggressively going after market share, they suddenly found they had
to produce far more planes than they thought they would
have to do in a very short space of time,
before they'd fully implemented their manufacturing process improvements. Tim Goree
was one of those workers brought on to help Boeing
get through its production crunch. Last September, he'd been hired
to help assemble wings on the new 777 wide-body jet.
With no seniority, he was laid off after working at
Boeing for only three months. I was shocked. The main
thing going through my mind was what are we going
to do for the bills. Well, I heard rumors before
we actually got our warn notices, but I really didn't
think that I was going to be affected in the
first round. Goree claims Boeing told him that he would
have a job for at least two years. Now he
worries how $360 in weekly jobless pay will cover his
family's expenses. We're not financially set. You know, we don't
have a savings account. We've been living week to week,
you know, paycheck to paycheck, and four kids and a
house payment, and everything, it's pretty tough, you know, especially
now that I don't know where the money's going to
be coming from. Boeing says it's facing tough economic times
too. Its share of new orders for commercial aircraft has
shrunk to fifty percent in the face of competition with
AirBus. In addition, the aerospace giant had to deal with
the economics of a huge merger with McDonnell-Douglas last year.
The company also posted its first annual loss in fifty
years in 1997. Economist Hill says Boeing has to become
more efficient in order to become more profitable. If you
look at productivity at AirBus, it takes 143 employees to
build an aircraft at AirBus; it takes 216 employees to
build an aircraft at Boeing. That's a very telling statistic
that tells you something about the belt of efficiency of
these two operations at this point in time. Boeing's Alan
Mulally, who heads the commercial plane division, points out that
the company has, in fact, started implementing changes to beat
the profit problem. He says Boeing is becoming more efficient
in its manufacturing and remains on schedule to deliver a
record number of jets next year. We have a commitment
to deliver the 620 airplanes next year. That looks really
good. The airlines want them. We're getting the airplane's production
system back in sequence where it's getting healthy again. We're
delivering airplanes, we're producing the airplanes. When we said we
were going to make them, the quality of the airplanes
gets better every day with every airplane, so the whole
team has rallied around getting our production health back from
this tough situation we've been. I think that through '99
and going forward, I think it'll give us a good
base to get back to a--you know--a profitable
and a healthy Boeing. Meantime, economist Dick Conway thinks the
Seattle area will weather the blow of the Boeing layoffs
because its economy is more diversified than in the past.
Back in 1970, when Boeing also had about 100,000 workers
in the area, the company accounted for about one in
three jobs in the entire economy here. Today, it's closer
to one in six jobs. That's why we figure that
we're better able to withstand a Boeing downturn--quite apart
from the fact that the anticipated cutbacks at Boeing are
quite a bit less than they were back in 1970.
But airline analysts say it could take up to five
years for Boeing to rebound. They say for Boeing to
survive, it must become more efficient and in the future,
that will mean building jets with far fewer workers. Finally
tonight a conversation about Cambodia. More than a million citizens
of that Southeast Asian nation died during the reign of
the Khmer Rouge government in the late 1970s. Today Cambodian
Prime Minister Hun Sen welcomed home two former Khmer Rouge
leaders and said it was time to bury the past.
Terence Smith recently recorded this conversation about Cambodia. After nearly
thirty years of war and turmoil, Cambodia today is a
crippled nation. An American journalist who has charted that country's
decline has written a powerful new book, "Cambodia, Report from
a Stricken Land." He is Henry Kamm, a Pulitzer Prize
winning former foreign correspondent for the New York Times. And
he joins us this evening. Henry, welcome. Hello, Terry. A
A little full disclosure I think is necessary here. You
and I have worked together. A good deal. Have been
friends for years and worked together, including in Southeast Asia.
Including in Southeast Asia and the Middle Eastern war at
one point. Tell me. Describe for me what Cambodia was
like--when you first went there nearly thirty years ago.
When I first went there, Cambodia was an--I suppose
it's a cliche to say--an island of peace in
wartorn Indochina. It was an--and its capital was a
very well tended city of broad avenues, lovely parks, and
above all, smiling faces and nowhere a threat of a
grenade to being thrown to break up dinner. Right. It
was pleasant. It was an exquisite place. Yes. And today?
Today, Cambodia is a country that remains devastated by the
various wars that have been waged in this territory. Its
roads are in horrid condition. Its cities have become--and
there are many, as you know--cities have become overcrowded,
overrun by rural populations in search of something better than
the totally impoverished life. Instead, they find in the cities
an equally impoverished life--no employment--and, above all,
they find--wherever they are--city or countryside--they find
a government that shows not a smidgen of interest in
their wellbeing. You write, in fact, of rural people, ordinary
Cambodians, who have flocked to the cities, living--what you
describe as an essentially rural life in the streets of
Phnom-Penh. Yes. Right. What do you mean? Rural life would
mean that you do not find your place in the
city. Your place begins with employment. It goes through steady,
permanent housing of some kind; it goes with schools that
are ready to receive your children and it goes with
the minimal services that, above all, medical services, that simply
are not available. And you talk about them tending livestock,
chickens, and what not, on the streets. They bring with
them what they can because the city offers them almost
nothing. And so, yes, there are chickens; there are pigs;
and occasionally even a buffalo walking down the main street.
You know, the most recent reports from Cambodia might suggest
a reason for hope. The last known group of Khmer
Rouge guerrillas recently surrendered. And now for better or for
worse there is an ostensibly united government under Hun Sen
that seems to have the blessing of King Sihanouk. Are
these hopeful signs? They are signs that are significant to
the .1% of the Cambodians who share in power. They
are of no significance to the 99.9% who have power
exercised upon them. The surrender of the Khmer Rouge was
a dead body that has now--one supposes been finally
buried. But they have been of no importance in Cambodia,
thank goodness, for the last two years. The election merely
ratified a totally irregular state of affairs that existed before,
namely that Hun Sen, who was put in power by
the Vietnamese invasion that took place in 1979, and who
never throughout the various exercises of politics that have occurred
in Cambodia since then, particularly the large United Nations' two
billion dollar enterprise that was supposed to bring peace, happiness
to the Cambodians--he maintained power throughout this--he lost
the UN-sponsored elections in 1993, but bludgeoned his way into
power, into a share of power. He gave to Sihanouk's
son, Prince Ranariddh the title of First Prime Minister but
the title of First Prime Minister is about as meaningful
as the notion of democracy in Cambodia. It was Hun
Sen and his machine, which has run Cambodia since then.
In the middle of last year he got tired of
having even this advertising sign of democracy, Ranariddh, with him
in sharing power, and threw him out in the coup
d'état, drove him out of the country. This was not
accepted by the international community. It's very difficult to accept
the overthrow of a regime that the entire world sponsored
into office. And so a compromise had to be arranged,
and since Prince Ranariddh likes power and money as much
as Hun Sen does, he accepted once more a place
in this new regime. But this is of no meaning
to the people of Cambodia. Hun Sen will continue to
rule with an iron fist. And King Sihanouk, formerly Prince
Sihanouk, the man who kept the balancing act going for
so many years? The man who did a splendid job
until he was--there were many flaws--but the essence
was that Sihanouk until 1970--until his overthrow--kept Cambodia
out of war. But since then he has grown aged,
he is very ill with cancer, and his power is
like the Pope's; he has no armies. And so he
has to consent to whatever is offered to him in
order at least to remain king and possibly try with
the very little power that he has to prevent the
worst. I think that he knows that he is doomed
not to succeed in that. You know, you mentioned earlier
the $2 billion effort--Yes.--by the United Nations in the
early 90s to come in to impose a ceasefire and
to hold elections. Right. For a while it seemed to
be a great success story and was pointed to that
way. But, in fact, that is not the case, is
it? It was painted as a great success because the
United Nations did a rather clever trick. The Paris agreement
under which they came into Cambodia to pacify it and
to hold elections was meant to pacify it, and all
of the parties in the Cambodian conflict signed on to
a surrender of their military. The Khmer Rouge were the
first ones to resent--to refuse to give up the
power; therefore, all the others followed suit, and so an
agreement that was supposed to bring peace and to demilitarize
Cambodia was never respected, and then the United Nations sort
of hid this away and said the purpose was to
hold free elections. These elections were held, but, again, their
result was vitiated. What does it say to you, who've
traveled the world widely and seen UN efforts elsewhere, what
does it say about the limits of this kind of
UN intervention? It's not entirely the United Nations' fault. It's
the fault of the major powers who bring about UN
resolutions and make UN decisions. The major powers raised no
objection when this United Nations-sponsored agreement was totally ignored really
and not really applied. You speak in your book of
a country beyond helping itself and have a suggestion at
the end about what might be the answer. It is
less than a suggestion, Terry. I feel that the Cambodian
elite, the Cambodian political elite, which is greatly diminished by
both the murders by the Khmer Rouge, the savageness of
the war that preceded, and the great flow of emigration
from Cambodia of some of its best people--that the
present elite, the present holders of power, who are really
interested only in the holding of power--in the profits
that this puts into their pockets--that these people are
quite incapable and totally uninterested in advancing the state of
the Cambodian people. And since I see no change possible
within this elite now, it seemed to me--and it
is not a suggestion because it's too fanciful to be
taken seriously--but it seems to me that if there
is to be hope for Cambodia, it would be to
put this brutally misruled country in the hands of some
benevolent, uninterested, impartial force--use this power to allow a
new generation of Cambodians to develop normally in a country
in which they're not being brutalized by their government, and
when this new generation which recognizes the responsibilities of an
elite for the fate of a nation is ready to
take over the country, then by all means the country
should be taken over by the Cambodians. A trusteeship, it
sounds like. A form of trusteeship, but an honest form
of trusteeship, totally untainted by any thought of neocolonialism. I
think Cambodia should live under its own leadership by its
own devices. I regret to say that I do not
think it is capable of doing so today. As you
suggest at the end of the book, it may be
unrealistic, but it is not unreasonable. It is realizable theoretically.
I doubt that the will exists to realize it, but
I will be delighted to see it realized. Henry Kamm,
thank you very much. Thank you. Again, the major stories
of this Tuesday, a formal bribery investigation began of Salt
Lake City's selection as the site for the 2002 Winter
Olympics; the House managers or prosecutors of President Clinton's impeachment
began preparing for a Senate trial; and heavy rains and
melting snow triggered floods and mudslides in Oregon and Washington
State. We'll see you online and again here tomorrow evening.
I'm Jim Lehrer. Thank you and good night.
