content
Good evening. Three domestic stories occupy much of our attention
tonight. What does today's FCC ruling on long distance phone
charges mean to phone users? The state of black America.
The poor have been relegated to an out of sight,
out of mind status in American life. We talk to
the man making that charge, the head of the Urban
League. And we have an expert update on the birth
control pill: do the risks outweigh the benefits? Jim Lehrer's
off; Judy Woodruff's in Washington. Judy? Also tonight, we'll hear
Secretary of State Shultz explain that he didn't make much
headway with the Soviets on resuming arms talks. There's news
about the U.S. easing economic sanctions against Poland, and Argentina
cutting off aid to U.S.-backed rebels in Nicaragua. And finally,
we'll visit some American missionaries in El Salvador who work
behind the guerrilla lines. I'm not afraid. But I'm not
afraid anywhere. I'm not afraid in Cleveland, where I come
from. Secretary of State George Shultz said today he had
made no progress on reopening nuclear arms talks in his
five-hour session with Andrei Gromyko yesterday. Shultz arrived in Oslo
to brief the Norwegian government on the talks and gave
a press conference where he was questioned about the talks
with the Soviet foreign minister in Stockholm. On the question
of getting the Soviets to return to the two sets
of Geneva arms negotiations, Mr. Shultz said this. In the discussions
that I had with Mr. Gromyko we discussed many different
aspects of arms control, and insofar as the two talks
covering nuclear issues are concerned, I have nothing positive to
report to you. The Soviets have said they would not
return to the talks until the U.S. and NATO withdrew
the medium-range missiles they've begun deploying in Western Europe. Mr.
Shultz did say the Soviets may be getting ready to
reopen the East-West talks on limiting conventional forces in Europe.
Other Western diplomats in Stockholm said Moscow's Warsaw Pact allies
were suggesting that those talks resume in mid-March. Meanwhile, the
Soviets say they have begun deploying nuclear missiles in East
Germany and Czechoslovakia to counter the NATO deployments. This was
reported today by the Soviet army newspaper Red Star. Judy?
The Federal Communications Commission today tentatively postponed proposed new charges
on local phone bills. In so doing, in delaying the
so-called access fees, the FCC officials acknowledged they were cancelling
most, if not all, of a planned reduction in interstate
long distance rates. AT&T had planned to cut its long
distance rates by more than 10% this April, but that
reduction had been tied to the payment of the access
fees, an added $2 a month, also beginning in April.
The FCC said it had decided to take most of
this year to conduct further studies to see whether the
fees would force some customers to give up their phone
service altogether. The FCC had been under heavy pressure from
Congress to delay the access fees and thus eliminate any
need for Congress to take action to block them. Republican
Senator Robert Dole today applauded the FCC move. Here we're
faced with legislation coming from the House, saying you're going
to have a permanent moratorium, it's never going to take
effect. And you have the Packwood bill, which I'm a
cosponsor of, which says you're going to have a four-year
delay. Now, facing that, I think the commission, the Federal
Communications Commission, said okay, let's act on this before--and
avoid any need for congressional action with a one-year moratorium.
That's essentially what's happened. They report to Congress by December
1st of this year. Then there's time for comments, and
I would guess it'll be probably next April, May or
June of 1985 before any final decision is made. However,
AT&T, some consumer groups and another member of Congress condemned
the FCC decision. AT&T said it would prove a disservice
to the customers it is intended to help by scuttling
long distance rate reductions. Colorado Congressman Timothy Wirth, who chairs
a communications subcommittee in the House, joined with a consumer
research group in charging the agency with playing politics, defusing
the issue during an election year while sticking by its
ultimate goal of imposing the fees. Among others applauding the
FCC decision was one of AT&T's chief competitors, MCI. The
FCC today joined the House of Representatives, the Department of
Justice, the Department of Commerce and a number of members
of the Senate in the view that AT&T's competitors should
not be required to pay so much more for access
until equal interconnection is available to them. And that could
have affected the competitive vitality of this industry. The net
effect, I believe, will be a healthy competition in the
long distance market and a growing number of alternative long
distance competitors for the consumer. Now we look at the
impact of today's news about delayed access charges and the
fees for AT&T's long distance competitors on the phone users.
With us is Merrill Brown, who covers telecommunications for The
Washington Post. Mr. Brown, let's take the delayed access charges
first, the $2 monthly charge that was to be imposed
for access for home users on long distance lines. How
much is it going to save consumers? Well, certainly this
year it'll save consumers $2 a month from April on
for the rest of this year. Therefore, $18 or so.
But in the long run it's very hard to tell
because of the conflicting estimates on costs you get about
long distance service. Clearly on local bills, though, $2 a
month is the consumer saving this year. So what will
make the difference presumably is whether the long distance rates
themselves will go down, what you charge for a national
long distance call, not the access fee. That's right. AT&T
said today that it may or may not--depending on
how it evaluates the numbers and how it evaluates the
FCC's final decision--lower its rates 10%. It's unclear what
they're going to do. There's a faction within AT&T that
says perhaps they ought to, to be able to compete
with the other long distance carriers like MCI. I see.
And then there's a faction that says what? That says
they ought not to take the hit on their bottom
line, that that inevitably will bring about if they do
cut rates that much. Now that they are no longer
a monopoly and they have to compete on Wall Street
with--well, with their competitors. Absolutely. Now, the FCC's decision,
as I understand it--am I right?--does not affect
the $6 access charge that big business has to pay,
that business of a certain size will have to pay
to get into the long distance lines. That's still in
place. Businesses of any size over two lines will pay
$6 a month beginning this year, and that is designed
to try to bring about an equilibrium. Also, the business
community didn't have the pressure mounted on Capitol Hill that
consumer groups did, and they're not the political force on
this issue that Congress perceived phone users and residences to
be. There aren't as many businesses as there are individual
phone users and voters. Exactly. Certainly not voters. But small
businesses that--am I right?--who have only one, who
use only one phone line and were to have to
pay the same $2 a month access charge, they like
individual consumers are relieved of that, is that right? As
of today's decision, they're exempted, yes. Now, how are the
local phone companies going to make up the revenues that
the $2 access fee was designed to pay them to
replace, as I understand it, the subsidy they used to
get from the long distance rates? Well, Bell System officials
say today that that's not really a problem, because the
same formulas by which long distance carriers subsidize local phone
service, in effect, are still in effect. And AT&T and
the other long distance companies are going to be paying
those local companies the same they paid them before divestiture
as it was. So I don't think that that's necessarily
going to be the case. Local phone-rate increases need not
take place because of today's decision. And even if proposals
are made to do so, state regulators can reject them
as they've been rejecting local phone-rate increases all year. Now,
why, if this is good for consumers, as Senator Dole
and the head of MCI we just heard say it
was, why are people like Nader's Congress Watch, a consumer
group, and Tim Wirth, a congressional Democrat who's been very
involved in this--why are they against this? Well, they
don't like the whole concept of access charges, basically. They
think it unfairly distributes the burden of the costs in
the phone system too much onto residential users. They say
that's unfair, and they'd like to see a permanent ban
on access charges put into place. Next year--As the
House in fact voted, a permanent moratorium. As the full
House has voted. They say that after June '85, when
access charges could go in place again, access charges may
well be in place again because there won't be the
election-year political pressure that was put on the FCC this
year. Since they are so unpopular with so many people,
is it likely that instead of just an interim solution,
this delay could become permanent and we'll never see access
charges? Well, that gets to the political question of what
Congress is going to do, and that is a very
difficult one to call right now. Thirty-two senators wrote to
the FCC just yesterday to ask them to do essentially
what they did today. That's a significant part of the
United States Senate. There's another 60-some-odd members who didn't express
their views, and there is a bill from Senator Packwood
which he intends to press for which would put on
a moratorium. We'll have to see. Political pressures in election
years, particularly on pocketbook issues, play funny twists, and they
should on this one too, I would think. So the
access charges could come back in the summer of 1985
or they could go away forever, we just don't know
yet. We don't know yet. Now, on the other decision
that was announced today, would you explain it to me?
As I understand it, AT&T's long distance competitors, like MCI,
had the rates they will have to pay for long
distance to the local companies to hook in for long
distance--were much lower than was expected. Now, can you
tell us the figures and what it means? Well, what
it means, according to the long distance industry, the competitive
long distance industry, that is, is that that's a much
more competitive business under this decision than under the previous
decision. They'll pay about half of what AT&T pays for
hookups into the local phone system now. Before, under the
previous decision they were paying considerably more than that, about
50% more than that. So if AT&T pays nine cents,
say, which is roughly what the figure is, to hook
into a local line now, MCI will pay four-some cents
to do the same thing. And it's their contention that
they shouldn't pay the same amount as AT&T as long
as they don't have the same kind of easy access
to consumers that AT&T has. If you want to use
MCI or Sprint or Allnet or a host of other
services that are out there, you have to punch a
lot of buttons, dial into the service, punch in your
personal billing code. It's a slightly more complicated procedure. And
the long distance competitors argue that until they have the
same kind of simple pushbutton, one-button access that the AT&T
company has, they shouldn't pay the same rates. And, briefly,
is the long-term effect of that through more competition to
bring down long distance phone rates, do you think? Well,
certainly for the people around the country who have access
to a long distance service, a competitive one, one competitive
with AT&T, it ensures that they'll keep the same kind
of low rates they have. For AT&T users or for
people who need AT&T for business services or for other
things, it probably suggests that they won't get the same
kind of cut AT&T was planning on. Well, Mr. Brown,
thank you. Judy? More good news about the economy today
on several fronts. The government said that Americans' personal income
was up 6.3% last year, the best showing since 1977.
Economists attributed the relatively healthy increase to last summer's income
tax cuts, more people finding work and lower inflation. Most
predicted personal income would not grow as much in 1984.
At the White House, however, a spokesman said the prospects
for a sustained economic recovery are very good. In another
measure of the recovery, the government also reported personal consumption
spending rose 8.4% last year, a little better than the
year before. That was mostly attributed to a sharp drop
in the rate of savings. In addition, first-time claims for
unemployment benefits hit their lowest point in four-and-a-half years in
the first week in January. President Reagan and his speechwriters
will use all that good economic news and more in
preparing his State of the Union address for next week,
a speech that reportedly will paint a rosy picture of
the nation's health. But today in Washington the National Urban
League, in its annual "State of Black America," offered a
very different portrayal of the economic conditions facing American blacks.
The report included chapters on such subjects as unemployment, education
and voter registration, and it cited numerous bleak statistics: an
18% unemployment rate for blacks, and the fact that more
than 50% of all black children live in families below
the poverty line. In releasing the report, Urban League president
John Jacob said simply, "The state of black America is
a disaster." Mr. Jacob is with is with us here
tonight to elaborate. Mr. Jacob, is the situation facing American
blacks as serious as what you have said? We believe
that all the evidence points in that direction. Clearly, as
the nation is moving toward an economic recovery, as unemployment
is going down around the nation somewhere around 8.1, 8.2%,
unemployment for blacks is at 18%; teenage unemployment is at
49%; a third of black people are living in poverty.
Therefore, even as the nation is going through a spirited
recovery, it is not trickling down to black America, and
black America is suffering and in desperate straits. Well, why
is that? Why is, despite the fact that we're seeing
all these improvements you mentioned in inflation and unemployment, that
blacks aren't able to share in the goodies? Well, I
think there are a number of factors, one of which
is that blacks have traditionally been in those jobs where
the industries are hemorrhaging--steel, rubber, auto--and many of
those jobs, even as they go through recovery will never
replace many of the jobs that they lost during the
recession. And so we paid a dear price for that.
Secondly I think blacks are confronted with the notion that
they were the last hired and first fired as a
result of the deep recession that we found ourselves in,
and therefore we are affected by all of that that
is happening. But I think thirdly, as you will note
when you go through this paper, that there is a
high-tech revolution that has taken place in the country, and
blacks are in a mismatch with that revolution. We either
live in the wrong place where high tech is being
suburbanized. We picked up degrees in education and social science
when high tech calls for another whole set of skills.
We are dealing with a phenomenon that suggests that there
are going to be a lot of jobs in the
high-tech area, and they're simple not coming about. Blacks only
occupy one out of every 20 high-tech jobs. And therefore
we have simply, for some reason, been faced with a
condition that has placed us in opposition to that particular
trend. Who's to blame for this? Well, I think there
are a number of places to place blame, one of
which is clearly that our society has never admitted that
it has to make a concerted effort for inclusion of
black people. The whole notion about affirmative action was designed
to do that. The whole notion about the public-service sector
accommodating a large sector of the black middle class allowed
for an upward mobility of blacks, and then the decimation
of the public-service arena calls for a broadening of the
gap between black America and white America. When you blame
it on society, you're not saying it's the fault of
the Republicans or the Democrats or Ronald Reagan or anyone
else; you're just saying white America? Well, I'm just saying
there are a set of economic circumstances that have not
worked to the advantage of black people, and that black
people have not been included in all of the developments
that have taken place. I am blaming on the administration,
however, in the exacerbation of the problem. When in fact
you look at where black people were three years ago,
four years ago, with the new administration and the reduction
or elimination of many of the vital programs that service
black people, that service poor people, where blacks were disproportionately
placed, conditions have, as a result of that, grown worse
for black America. What does the report say should be
done to remedy this? Well, we make a number of
proposals, one of which is that we believe that the
first priority item for black America must be jobs. Therefore
there must be a multidimensional strategy to provide work and
training opportunities for black people. That is not going to
be done with a single-dimensional program, and so we call
for public works, we call for public service, we call
for rewarding the private sector for hiring the long-term unemployed,
in training the long-term unemployed, and we call for an
industrial policy commitment that says that we will retrain those
people that are being displaced out of the smokestack industries.
And who's going to pay for all those jobs and
all that retraining? Well, I think what we ought to
ask is who's paying for all the high unemployment, because
if you look at the numbers today, all economists will
agree that for every point of unemployment above 4%, it
costs this country, either in lost taxes or in supporting
higher unemployment, from $20 billion to $30 billion per point.
So even with 8% unemployment, on the low side we're
talking about $80 billion to support unemployment, and on the
high side we're talking about $120 billion. I submit to
you there ought to be more creative use of those
dollars in order to get people working and training. But
Mr. Jacob, you know what the political climate is in
this country with Ronald Reagan maintaining pretty high ratings in
the public opinion polls right now, and we know what
his philosophy is. What do you think the chances are
realistically that that sort of program would ever pass the
Congress? Well, I think the chances are that the black
vote is going to be decisive in 1984, and is
going to be decisive not only in the presidential election
but in senatorial elections. And I submit to you that
those who are serious about attracting the black vote will
have to address these problems that are critical to black
America. What do you mean by that? I mean that
they will have to come forth with an agenda that
deals specifically with the interests and needs of black America
if in fact they expect to get the black vote.
But Ronald Reagan, one would presume, doesn't feel that he
needs the black vote, or very much of the black
vote, in order to win again. Well, I would hope
that Mr. Reagan would reassess that because I think the
black vote is going to be very decisive, particularly in
determining the electoral college votes. Our report speaks to where
those black voters are concentrated. They are concentrated in the
large cities and the large states where the electoral college
votes must come from. And so I would say that
Mr. Reagan must reassess if in fact he hoped to
remain at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue. So you haven't given up
on Ronald Reagan; you're saying you hope to change his
mind, is that right? Well, no, what I'm saying is
that I hope Mr. Reagan understands the political realities that
all the other candidates must come to grips with, and
that in 1984 it is our contention that the black
vote is going to play a major role in who
occupies the White House. All right, thank you very much,
John Jacob, for being with us. Thank you. Robin? The
United Nations Food and Agricultural Organization said today that nearly
half the countries in Africa are threatened by massive hunger
and starvation this year. The FAO said a significant part
of the 150 million people living in 24 countries in
East, West and Southern Africa faced grave food shortages. The
causes were bushfires, livestock diseases, pests and civil disturbances, but
the greatest was drought, considered the worst in a century
in some areas. The U.N. agency said that 5.3 million
tons of grains were needed for 1983-1984, of which 3.7
million tons had already been secured. Meanwhile in Washington, Senator
John Danforth reported on his own personal observation of the
hunger problem in Africa. The Missouri Republican was asked by
Majority Leader Howard Baker to make a personal inspection trip.
The results, including Senator Danforth's own photographs, were presented to
President Reagan yesterday and made public at a news conference
today. Africa now is the number one hunger problem in
the world. This mother could not give milk to the
child. She was very hungry herself, and, as often true
with hungry mothers, they cannot produce sufficient milk for the
child, and you see the result. And all ages, of
course, affected. The legs on that boy I think are
illustrative. The people in one of the villages had had
no food since November, and their diet consisted of leaves
from trees, roots, and cashew nuts. And one of the
things that I talked to the President about yesterday is
the immediate need in Mozambique not only to make sure
food is available--I think more important than anything else
is to designate some organization, such as CARE or some
other organization, to actually be present and to be responsible
for the delivery of the food and the distribution of
the food. I think if we're going to have any
type of possible--any sort of possibility of relative independence
for that part of the world, there is going to
have to be development assistance, again targeted to those countries
where it's going to do some good. The United States
is now spending about $300 million a year in emergency
food aid for Africa. Senator Danforth estimates that an additional
$200 million in development assistance is needed. We'll be back
in a moment. In Casablanca, the Islamic Conference Organization decided
tonight to readmit Egypt to membership five years after Egypt
was suspended for signing a peace treaty with Israel. The
Egyptians have indicated they're interested in rejoining the 45-nation body,
but have declared they would not submit to any conditions,
such as repudiating the Israeli-Egyptian treaty. In Lebanon, the guns
around Beirut were silent for a day while both Moslems
and Christians closed their classrooms in mourning for the president
of the American University, who was killed yesterday. But in
a mountain area near the northern city of Tripoli, four
people were killed and 14 wounded in a fight between
two rival factions of pro-Syrian Moslems. And in the southern
city of Sidon, gunmen attacked an Israeli patrol, touching off
a 30-minute firefight that closed the port and the business
area for the third day in a row. In Washington,
the State Department announced a relaxation of American economic sanctions
against Poland. By order of President Reagan, the Polish national
airline will be allowed to land its planes on charter
flights to the United States and Polish vessels will be
allowed to fish in American waters. And in Rome, Pope
John Paul has been discussing the possibility of opening diplomatic
relations between the Vatican and the Communist government of Poland,
perhaps later this year. Cardinal Jozef Glemp, the head of
the Polish Catholic Church, told reporters about it today as
he left Rome after a four-day visit. Judy? Argentina's new
government, headed by democratically elected President Raul Alfonsin, announced today
that it was ending all assistance to counterrevolutionary forces in
Central America. Those include the so-called contras the United States
is backing in their struggle against the Marxist government in
Nicaragua. Alfonsin said he was aligning Argentina with Mexico and
other Latin countries which are seeking negotiated settlements to end
the disputes there. Meanwhile, there has been more fighting in
El Salvador, where government troops are trying to prevent leftist
guerrillas from destroying the last remaining bridge over a major
waterway. The Lempa River divides the eastern third of El
Salvador from the rest of the country. Since September the
rebels have made significant gains toward their goal of taking
over the area east of the river and declaring it
a liberated zone. Chirilagua is a small town in the
eastern third, located behind rebel lines. Our special correspondent, Charles
Krause, recently spent five days there and discovered that even
though the town is controlled by guerrillas, there is still
an important American presence there. Chirilagua fell to the guerrillas
last September 25th. Every two or three days, patrols from
nearby guerrilla bases entered Chirilagua to make their presence felt,
but otherwise life here hasn't changed very much since the
guerrillas took control. Buses still connect Chirilagua with other parts
of El Salvador. The post office still functions. And despite
their avowed Marxism, the guerrillas have made no attempt to
disrupt Chirilagua's religious life. On Sundays there's been no change
at Our Lady of Guadalupe Church. Mass is still celebrated,
very much as usual. What is unusual is that for
many years the Chirilagua parish has been staffed by American
missionaries from Cleveland, Ohio. That hasn't changed either. Well, since
the end of September the guerrillas have nominal control over
the town. They haven't hindered us in any way. We're
cautious. You know, we can't accept necessarily their beliefs or
their philosophical background they're coming from--it's not the same
as ours--and it's a delicate and complicated situation. Father
John Loya is one of four American missionaries in Chirilagua.
He, Father David Fallon, Sisters Therese Osborne and Maria Berlich,
are believed to be the only American priests and nuns
living and working behind guerrilla lines in El Salvador. But
unlike some other foreign priests who've embraced the guerrillas, these
Americans are not radicals or political activists. It's a really
tense situation because, coming from the United States where we
have a tradition of freedom of speech, it is very
hard to adjust to a situation in which you don't
feel that same liberty. Sister Therese told us that she
and her colleagues from Cleveland view their mission as ministering
to the needs of the people of Chirilagua, regardless of
which side has political control of the town and surrounding
area. We're foreign missionaries, and I think that we are
fulfilling a role right now in the country, helping people,
helping the Christian communities. And we want to be able
to remain in this area. Father David has been in
El Salvador for six years. He's the senior member of
the Cleveland mission and pastor of the Chirilagua church. Before
we came here, there was no priest; and if we
weren't here, there wouldn't be any priests or sisters, so
that our work is very extensive. A lot of the
work is sacramental work, that is, celebrating the Mass and
baptism and weddings, other sacraments. But despite that, I like
to think that the focus we have is to encourage
and train lay leadership, knowing that we can be there,
seldom be there--somebody has to do most of the
work of evangelizing, of bringing the message of Christ to
others. In addition to their work in the town of
Chirilagua, the priests celebrate Mass at least once a month
in about 25 small villages, villages like El Cucol. The
American missionaries work in an area of about 100 square
miles, all of it now at least nominally controlled by
the guerrillas. One of the communities we visit is named
Guadalupe. We usually only go there once a month, but
I was visiting there and I knew this woman was
ill; I'd visited her before in a community called La
Nina Chinita, it means like the child--it's term of
endearment; her name is really Cypriana. She's been living there
for about, oh, better part of a year. And so
I decided to bring her Communion, because I knew that
she wanted Communion. And she was just overjoyed to have
a visit. Simple faith. She knows she's ill, she doesn't
want to go to a hospital; she wants to die
at home. One of the things that struck me quite
quickly was the way people are very close to the
birth and death. People are born in their homes, not
in hospitals, in the rural areas. They die in their
homes. They prepare the body. On more than one occasion
I have been celebrating a Mass or wedding, and because
at that same time someone died, they brought the body
in. And we had a wedding and a funeral at
the same time, and the people were not upset in
the least. They're just not hidden from those realities. Outsiders
are often shocked by how primitive conditions are. Sister Maria
told us that she too was shocked when she first
came to Chirilagua three years ago. The actual reality of
Chirilagua was much different than just seeing it in the
pictures and in the slides, because the poverty of some
of the places is really striking. I just couldn't believe
that people really did live in little stick huts. Infant
mortality is high. Life expectancy for adults is low. At
least once a week Sister Therese travels to outlying villages
in the parish, often by horseback to work with volunteer
health teams. It's not strictly religious work. But it is
very much a part of what the Cleveland mission is
all about. Each local community has three to seven team
members who will learn about certain health themes and then
present them to their neighbors. The health needs are so
great that if we were to work on the curative
aspect, giving shots or dispensing medicines, we wouldn't even begin
to scratch the surface. So we're trying to work in
the preventive angle, hoping to prevent mostly infant deaths. If
children do survive, education is a luxury many of their
parents cannot afford. By the age of eight or nine,
many children in El Salvador, especially in rural areas, must
work. Sister Maria has taught reading skills to illiterate adults,
but most of her work is with children, who learn
more than just religion in her classes. It's unrealistic to
expect that they'll ever be able to reach any high
formal level of education. At least they will have had
the dignity of saying, "Once I did go to school,
and I did learn something." What even the best-educated Salvadorans
have not learned is how to resolve their economic and
political differences. When Chirilagua fell last fall, the guerrillas explained
their political program and promised not to invite an army
attack by occupying the town full time. About a thousand
government supporters fled, fearing the guerrillas would confiscate private property
and kill those identified with the government. The situation here
could have been most difficult and dangerous for Fathers David
and John, Sisters Therese and Maria. They are, after all,
Catholic missionaries living in a town controlled by Marxist revolutionaries,
and Americans working in an area dominated by guerrillas who
consider the United States their principal enemy. We asked them
if they weren't afraid to remain here, knowing the guerrillas
could one day turn on them, or the government could
accuse them of being leftist sympathizers if the army ever
regains control of Chirilagua. There's always a certain amount of
uncertainty associated with a situation like this of conflict--what's
going to happen next? We feel it, the people feel
it. I would think that we are being treated or
approached as individuals. The boys will condemn the Yankees and
the imperialism and everything like that, but they've met four
of us here, and have respected us in that regard.
Human right, or human value, or whatever values they're working
with. People are very, very nervous. Many of them are
suffering from nervous disorders now with the constant tension. One
side may be in charge today, and another side may
be in charge tomorrow. And as long as there are
two different sides, maybe there isn't any problem right now,
but if there's a battle--they call it in Spanish
an enfrentamiento--people are going to be hurt and people
are going to be killed, and I guess that's their
constant fear. I'm not afraid. But I'm not afraid anywhere.
I'm not afraid in Cleveland, where I come from. And
anything could have happened to me where I used to
live in Cleveland, the same as anything can happen to
me here. So I think that's where my idea of
what faith and who God is comes in. We can
travel a road of faith or we can travel a
road of fear. And as a priest, following the example
of our Lord, a great deal of my job or
my vocation is to help people make the decision: what's
the basic denominator that we're living our lives by? Is
it by faith or is it by fear? This is
one way of spreading or teaching the Gospel. You may
remember that in 1980 four American churchwomen were killed in
El Salvador. Their families are reportedly angry at a State
Department decision this week not to release a report on
the failure of the Salvadoran government to bring to trial
five soldiers accused of murdering the Americans. Two of the
women were from Cleveland, members of the same team of
missionaries working in Chirilagua. We'll be back in a moment.
In New York, a federal appeals court tonight turned down
a last-minute effort by former New Jersey Senator Harrison Williams
to delay beginning his prison sentence for bribery in the
Abscam investigation. In an unusual hearing after the usual court
hours, the Second Circuit Court of Appeals denied a request
for delay so Williams could file another appeal against his
conviction. That left Williams under orders by the trial judge
to report to the federal prison in Allenwood, Pennyslvania, by
midnight tonight to begin his three-year sentence. The medical examiner
in San Antonio, Texas, ruled today that Major General Robert
Owenby, the Army reservist who was found hanged in a
stairwell, committed suicide. When the general's body was found eight
days ago, his hands were bound behind his back and
there was a note pinned to his clothes saying he
had been executed. The medical examiner said today that tests
made by his office and the FBI led to the
conclusion that the general wrote the note himself as a
deception. The examiner also said that Owenby was deeply in
debt. Robin? Now, stories from our medical beat. First, new
evidence was reported today linking damage to unborn babies with
mothers who smoke cigarettes during pregnancy. A study made at
Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore showed that young rats whose
mothers were exposed to moderate amounts of carbon monoxide during
pregnancy suffered impaired memories and ability to learn. The researchers
said the amounts of carbon monoxide were similar to the
amounts taken in by a heavy smoker. The effect on
memory was said to be more pronounced, but there was
also an effect on learning ability. Earlier tests have shown
that the children of women who smoked heavily during pregnancy
suffer a handicap when taking achievement tests. Our next major
segment tonight is an update on the birth control pill.
Twenty-four years after it was introduced, revolutionizing birth control in
this country, the debate over how dangerous the pill is
still rages. Charlayne Hunter-Gault has the details. Charlayne? Even with
inconclusive results in the debate over the pill, some 150
million women worldwide have used it. That makes the pill
the most widely used form of birth control, second only
to sterilization. Over the years, however, various studies have linked
the pill to problems like increased risk of stroke, heart
attack, blood clots, high blood pressure, cervical cancer and breast
cancer. But other studies have shown that the pill also
has a protective effect, lowering the risk of ovarian cancer,
endometrial cancer, which affects the lining of the womb, and
pelvic inflammatory disease, the leading cause of sterility in women.
Occasionally the studies that are released seem to contradict each
other outright. For example, several studies last fall found a
higher rate of breast cancer, particularly among women who used
the pill before their first pregnancy. But last March, another
report by the Centers for Disease Control found just the
opposite. It said neither short nor long-term oral contraceptive use
appeared to increase a woman's risk of breast cancer. The
head of that study is Dr. Howard Ory, deputy director
of epidemiology for the CDC. He has been studying both
the protective effects and the drawbacks of the pill for
13 years. He joins us tonight from Atlanta. Dr. Ory,
what's your overall viewpoint about the safety of the pill?
Dr. Ory, in Atlanta, can you hear me? Yes, I
can now. Good, thank you. My question was, what's your
view overall about the safety of the pill? Well, I
think for a young healthy woman that the benefits outweigh
the risks. Do you want to elaborate on that a
little bit? Sure. I think that the major risk of
oral contraceptives is heart attacks and strokes. You probably said
this--I didn't have audio when you were at the
beginning. And I think that risk is mainly confined to
women who are over 35 and who smoke. For example,
I estimate that about 500 women in the U.S. a
year, out of the 10 million who use the pill,
die as a result of oral contraceptive use. And most
of those, probably about 400, I would estimate, are in
the group who are over 35 and who smoke. On
the other hand, young healthy women derive the benefit of
not getting pregnant, of course, from taking the pill, and
then they have many other benefits in addition to that,
that have a--All right, excuse me. We'll get to
the benefits in a minute. But let me just ask
you this question. How do you explain the fact that
there are at least three other studies that contradict your
conclusions about the risk of breast cancer? You say there
is no significant risk, but these others say there is.
Well, it's real difficult--I think if you look at
the picture overall, I think all studies, there are maybe
12 or 13 of them now, would say that there
is no increased risk of breast cancer. There are two
studies out now that dwell on particular subgroups of women--
one, women who took the pill before age 25 and
who used particular brands, and another that looks at women
who took the pill before their first birth. Both of
those studies together are not as large as our study
and they're not as representative of the U.S. either. I
see. Now, earlier, you said you didn't hear my delineation
of some of the protective effects, but I listed a
number of those effects. How important exactly are they in
weighing the risk and benefits? Well, I think that the
major benefit, of course, is the very powerful protection against
unwanted pregnancy. I think of them as an added benefit,
the other benefits. I wouldn't use the pill to derive
those benefits, but if you're using it to prevent pregnancy,
you'd get these additional benefits. In your view, is all
the evidence in on the dangers of the pill, or
at least enough in that you could pretty much say
without being worried about it that the pill is generally
safe for everybody to use, except for those subgroups you
mentioned? Well, I think we have seen about 15 to
20 years of epidemiologic studies on the pill. It's impossible,
of course, to predict what's going to happen to women
as they get to be 60 and 70, because there
are no women who took the pill who, you know,
who are now in their 60s and 70s. But given
that caveat, I think that we know the major problems
with the pill already. All right, thank you. We'll come
back. Robin? Another researcher, who sees the risks differently, is
Dr. Diana Petitti, who has studied the effects of the
pill for seven years. Dr. Pettiti is an assistant professor
of community medicine at the University of California at San
Francisco, and she joins us tonight from public station KQED.
Dr. Pettiti, when Dr. Ory says the benefits outweigh the
risks, what is your opinion? Well, it's my opinion that
we don't know enough yet about the relationship of oral
contraceptives to breast cancer to be certain that the benefits
outweigh the perhaps equal, but I want to reserve judgment,
my judgment about the ultimate risk-benefit equation until the story
on breast cancer is clarified. And what will clarify that?
Well, I hate to say, but it may be further
research. I see. And over how many years, do you
think? I don't think we'll know for certain whether or
not oral contraceptives have an effect on breast cancer at
ages 60 or 70 until women who have used oral
contraceptives become 60 or 70 years of age. Since oral
contraceptives were first marketed in the 1960s, and were only
used widely in perhaps the late 1960s and the early
'70s, it probably won't be for another 10 or 20
years that we have the full answer about the relationship
of oral contraceptives to breast cancer. Statistically, with the known
risks, like an increased risk of stroke or a heart
attack, statistically how common is that risk? Dr. Ory just
said 500 women out of 10 million, perhaps. Is that
of the order of the risk, in your view? I
don't--I think Dr. Ory was quoting figures for mortality.
I think if you add in the cases where there
is an event, say, of myocardial infarction or a stroke,
that the woman doesn't die, that the total number of
cases in the United States may be three to five
times that high. I think the risks are low--they're
probably lower than the risk of getting into an automobile
accident and becoming seriously injured if one doesn't fasten one's
seat belt. But that's not the question. The question is
whether or not oral contraceptives are more or less safe
than alternative forms of birth control that women might use
if oral contraceptives were not so--didn't have other benefits,
particularly the benefit of being easy to use and highly
effective. Now, would you recommend the birth control pill as
a primary, as the first form of contraception or birth
control? No, I wouldn't. I would recommend that all women
who can use barrier methods of contraception successfully--that means
methods of contraception such as the diaphragm or the condom,
or the foam and condoms, that that would be my
first choice of birth control for all women in the
United States. Of course that, I understand, lowers the effectiveness
of the birth control, does it not? I think the
effectiveness of the diaphragm and of condoms is dependent on
how well the person uses them. I think there's some
recent evidence that women over 35 who are married and
in a stable relationship have an effectiveness rate for use
of the diaphragm which is almost the same as that
for the pill. Are there some kind--is there one--
is there a category of women who in your view
should not be using the pill? Oh, yes, certainly. Women
over 35 years of age who smoke cigarettes should not
use the pill. Because of an increased risk of stroke
or heart attack? Heart attacks, strokes. And women who are
over 35 who do not smoke? I think there's still
some question. It would be my advice that women over
35 who don't smoke and who are certain that they're
not going to have any more children should consider sterilization.
On the other hand, for a perfectly healthy woman with
no family history of heart disease, I think using the
oral contraceptive might be reasonable, particularly if it's a low-dose
oral contraceptive. Well, thank you. Charlayne? Dr. Ory, what do
you say to Dr. Petitti's feeling that there should be
at least another 10 to 20 years of research before
you can definitively say or even recommend that women use
the pill? She's just not convinced that it's as safe
as you say. Well, I can't argue with that. On
the other hand, people have to make a decision today,
and I wouldn't throw the pill out because we're not
absolutely 100% certain that it's--that this, that or the
other thing wouldn't happen. I think we are reasonably certain
now that young healthy women can use it with a
good margin of safety. Dr. Petitti, what about that response?
And in addition to which, he had said earlier that
there are at least 12 to 13 studies, compared with
the two or three--12, 13 supporting his position that
the benefits outweigh the risks, as opposed to two or
three that say they don't? Well, first, I certainly agree
with Dr. Ory that we shouldn't throw out the pill
as a form of birth control. However, I think it
has to do with how we advocate the pill in
relationship to other forms of contraception with similar effectivenesses when
used properly. What do you mean by that? Do you
think the public is being misled or--Well, I think
that certain people are advocating the use of the pill
as an entirely safe form of contraception, that its benefits
strongly outweigh its risks and that its risks are really
minimal. I don't think we can say that. You mean
certain people like Dr. Ory? No, I haven't heard Howard
say that in public. Dr. Ory, is that your position?
No. My position is that for a young healthy woman,
I think--I quite agree with Diana that the safest--
the method of contraception that has the lowest mortality would
probably be to use a diaphragm or condom or some
barrier method, and if you get pregnant, to back that
up with an abortion. That, if that is morally acceptable
to you, is the form of birth control that has
the lowest mortality and complication rate. However, once you put
that aside, I think that, say, for people under age
35, that the pill, the IUD, the condom, diaphragm, if
you look at the overall mortality, deaths, that those women
face, they're about the same. What about that, Dr. Petitti?
I'm not quite certain whether Howard said that they're all
the same. I think that we don't know what's going
to happen with breast cancer, that there have been 13
or 14 studies. However, only the most recent of those
studies, including that of Dr. Ory, has addressed the question
of whether or not early use of oral contraceptives by
women before their first pregnancy will be entirely safe, partly
safe, very risky, or a little bit risky. Well, don't
a lot of women--perhaps not a lot of women,
but aren't women before the age of 25 who have
not had children, don't they run the risk of breast
cancer whether they take the pill or not? Certainly the
very fact of having delayed birth until later years increases
their risk of breast cancer. However, the studies that have
been published most recently have shown that use of oral
contraceptives for a long period of time increases their risk
over and above that of having delayed the age at
which they have their first child. Dr. Ory, if this
is--Can I disagree with that? Sure. I think that
that is--that Diana is putting her finger on what
I think is the problem with those two studies, the
Pike study and the Vessey study, they don't have enough
numbers to adequately control for the age that women have
their first child. And I think that's what our study
can do, and we don't see that risk. Well, I
had a comment about Dr. Ory's study, which was that
in his study, women were included up through the ages
of 55, and that in both of the studies that
found an increased risk of oral contraceptive use for breast
cancer in women using oral contraceptives before their first pregnancy,
they included women who are quite a lot younger--a
large number of women who were a lot younger. The
maximum age in Dr. Pike's study was 37 and in
Dr. Vessey's most recently published study about 45. And I
think that it's only now that we're beginning to have
sufficient numbers of women who have used oral contraceptives for
long periods of time before their first pregnancy, that we
can begin to answer the question. So that in my
opinion, many of the 10 to 13 studies of breast
cancer that have been done do not shed light on
that important question. Dr. Ory, we just have a few
seconds left. What's a woman who is very confused about
what to do, what's she to do if experts like
the two of you and these studies disagree? What would
you suggest? Well, you know, like anything else, you have
to weigh the evidence as best you can and make
a decision. I mean I don't know completely if everything
I eat is unhealthy or healthy to me, but I
make my choices and I do it. And, you know,
Diana and I are both looking at the same data
and coming up with slightly different conclusions, but I think
both of us are saying that the pill is a
reasonable form of contraception. All right, well, I'll have to
leave it on that interpretation and hope that Dr. Petitti
also meant the same thing. Thank you both. Judy? Finally
tonight, a story from the mountains of Southwest China, where
the world's only population of wild giant pandas faces the
danger of imminent starvation. There are fewer than a thousand
of these animals living in the wild, and their number
is expected to drop even lower because of a severe
shortage of bamboo, their diet staple. Experts predict the crisis
will worsen within six months and will continue for five
to eight years until the bamboo, through its natural cycle,
is replenished. Today, the World Wildlife Fund held a news
conference in Washington to explain the efforts under way to
save the pandas. I would estimate that about a quarter
of all the pandas remaining in the wild face a
real emergency. Now, as to the rescue methods, there are
really three basic kinds. One is to build some holding
stations where starving pandas can be taken to be rehabilitated
for eventual release back into the wild. Another method is
supplementary feeding of animals in the wild. The final, main
method is to transfer animals to a new habitat. When
you only, let's say, have a thousand animals, every single
one that you save has potential for considerable impact. Lets
hope they do find a way to save them. Good
night, Robin. Good night, Judy. That's our NewsHour for tonight.
We will be back tomorrow night. I'm Robert MacNeil. Good
night.
