content
Good evening. Leading the news this Wednesday, Nicaragua's Sandinista government
declared a unilateral cease-fire in the war against the contras.
The Supreme Court issued two rulings expanding police search powers,
and the space shuttle Atlantis was successfully launched after five
attempts. We'll have details in our News Summary in a
moment. Jim. After the News Summary, Kwame Holman interviews the
defeated President of Nicaragua, Daniel Ortega. We have a debate
over using criminal charges against corporations such as Exxon. The
debaters are lawyers Robert Adler and Richard Samp. And then
two views of a new report on medical malpractice. They
are those of New York State Health Commissioner David Axelrod
and Lawyer Dr. Harvey Wachsman. Nicaragua's Sandinista government today declared
a unilateral cease-fire in the war against the U.S.-backed contras.
President Daniel Ortega said the decision was made to achieve
the immediate de-mobilization of the contras. In an exclusive interview
with the Newshour, Mr. Ortega was asked by Correspondent Kwame
Holman what would be the consequences if the contras did
not disband. That's extremely serious because that threatens all of
the security of the entire country. Well, as long as
I'm President, I'm going to take whatever measures are necessary
in order to ensure the defense of our country and
the security of each and every citizen, because the alternative
would be a civil war. We will have the full
interview with Mr. Ortega after the News Summary. At a
news conference President-elect Violeta Chamorro joined Ortega in calling for
an end to hostilities. She said the causes that started
the civil war have now disappeared and appealed to the
contras to return home peacefully. A contra spokesman in Honduras
said his fighters are ready to discuss this with Mrs.
Chamorro. The spokesman, Alejandro Elsavedo cautioned "Without us here, there
is no one to insist that Ortega step down. But
under the right conditions, we would demobilize sooner." There are
believed to be 10,000 U.S.-backed rebels based in Honduras. In
Washington, Secretary of State Baker said today that the United
States agrees the contras should be disbanded. He made his
comments before a Senate committee. -- We think that with good
will and the support of the international community, the U.N.,
the OAS, and others that this issue can be resolved
and we think it will be resolved. The war is
over, Mr. Chairman, in Nicaragua. Pres. Bush called Soviet Pres.
Gorbachev this morning to discuss the Nicaragua situation and other
matters. Mr. Bush said the conversation lasted about 40 minutes.
He described to reporters aboard Air Force 1 on his
way to a political appearance in New York. This morning
I had a very good talk with Pres. Gorbachev. We
touched on matters relating to Nicaragua and Central America, and
also matters relating to the changes in Europe. It was
a very -- I'm not going to say any more of
the details of the talk, but the, it was a
very constructive conversation. Why did you want to call -- Discussing
these two areas -- and I'm not going to go into
the details of the talk, but I think it's important
that there be some confidentiality if we're going to be
able to speak as frankly as we did today. The
President said he and Gorbachev plan to continue such one
on one consultations. Jim. The U.S. Supreme Court today ruled
on two right to search cases. The court approved the
search of an armed robbery suspect's Maryland home. They said
no search warrant was needed because there was a reasonable
belief a dangerous person was hiding inside. In the other
case, federal agents, also without a warrant, searched a suspected
Mexican drug dealer's home in Mexico. The Justices again said
none was needed because the U.S. Constitution's ban against unreasonable
searches does not apply to non-Americans outside U.S. borders. Also
in Washington today, D.C. Mayor Marion Barry pleaded innocent to
eight counts of cocaine possession and lying to a grand
jury. A U.S. District Court judge set a June 4th
trial date. The Northrop Corporation has pleaded guilty to falsifying
test data on two weapons systems sold to the U.S.
military. The defense contractor admitted giving the government false information
about defective parts for the Cruise Missile and Harrier Jet.
Northrop agreed to pay a $17 million fine. The company
is also under investigation for fraud in its Stealth Bomber
program. The space shuttle Atlantis began a secret military mission
today. It blasted off from Cape Canaveral, Florida, just before
3 AM Eastern Time. Its flight path took it up
the East Coast. It was reportedly seen as far North
as Washington, D.C. Five previous attempts to launch the shuttle
were scrubbed due to poor weather, computer problems and Mission
Commander John Creyton's cold. The crew is expected to remain
in space until Sunday. The primary mission is believed to
be the deployment of a spy satellite. The U.S. government
today revised its latest figure on economic growth for the
better. The Commerce Department said the gross national product for
the last quarter of 1989 grew by .9 percent instead
of the initial estimate of .5 percent. It's still the
slowest growth rate in three years. It brings the GNP
increase for all of 1989 to 3 percent compared to
4.4 percent the previous year. The Soviet parliament today approved
a new law allowing individuals to lease farm land. Farmers
will also be able to pass on the leases to
their children. The law is part of Pres. Gorbachev's plan
to restructure the nation's economy. It overturns the longstanding socialist
policy against private land use. But the sale or outright
ownership of land will still be barred under the new
law. And that's it for the News Summary tonight. Now
it's on to Pres. Daniel Ortega of Nicaragua, criminal charges
against Exxon, and a new medical malpractice report. We begin
tonight with a News Maker interview with Nicaragua's outgoing President
Daniel Ortega. Mr. Ortega and the woman who defeated him
on Sunday Violeta Chamorro have began negotiations on a peaceful
democratic changeover of power which would be the first in
Nicaragua's history. A major stumbling block is the fate of
the Anti-Sandanista Contras, the rebel group financed by the United
States. Earlier today Correspondent Kwame Holman talked to President Ortega
in Managua. The interpreter was Alejandro Bendana, the Secretary General
of the Nicaraguan Foreign Ministry. Thank you for being here
Mr. President. Were you surprised by the election results. Did
you know at any time before hand that the outcome
would go against you? Frankly it is in the nature
of any election to consider the possibility of losing. But
I thought that we could reach a majority. The UNO
had been depicted by many as disorganized and unable to
win. Why do you think your party was rejected by
the people? Well the people had two options before them,
at least perceived that. The Perenta which was saying that
everything was going to get better and the UNO basically
having the same message. And the people, of course, had
been strongly pressured because of American policy particularly in their
economic terms and social terms. So that many people that
did give their vote to UNO will have their heart
with Perenta. But what they said was that may be
with UNO the problems that Perenta was not able to
solve can be solved and that would explain why the
vote went the way that it did. At the rally
yesterday were those positions demands of the incoming government and
which would you consider the most important? These are now
the demands of the Opposition of the Sandinista Front, of
the biggest political party in Nicaragua and these demands have
to do with the basis of the revolutionary process. And
I feel that there has to be a consensus that
the fundamental basis of the revolution should not be altered
because that would be altering democracy. Democracy should be strengthened.
And which are the primary or the most important aspects
of that? The agrarian reform for example, having the bank
and natural resources in State hands, to respect the professional
character and the institutionality of the Army and the Ministry
of the Interior. That State employees should not get fired
wholesale. These were indeed parts of their platform. Indeed they
were. Is it reasonable for Mrs. Chamorro to call for
the ouster of your brother as head of the Army?
Well she has the right to speak out and to
take a position but she must also take in to
account the realities that have come about over the last
few years and the changes that have taken place. Indeed
she should be thankful to the revolution for having been
able to achieve the Presidency. So she should take into
account those elements of the revolution which different sectors consider
vital to feeling secure. So in essence you would accept
the ouster of top military and political people but not
much further down into the army, into the bureaucracy? These
are points that are still being dealt with. The negotiations
for the transition are taking place and this is some
of the subject matters that have to be covered. President
Gorbachev and President Bush have both accepted the results of
the election. Have you spoken to Mr. Gorbachev? No I
haven't. Do you feel that there was any role that
Mr. Gorbachev and the Soviet Union could have played prior
to the election that would have helped you in the
election as the United States provided funds for the opposition
party? Well this was an election among Nicaraguans but there
is no denying of reality that the whole of Nicaragua
was under siege by U.S. pressures, U.S. sanctions, U.S. policy.
So our elections did take place but in very special
conditions. Like people with a gun to the head of
our people. It was a gun that took the form
of economic embargo as a result of U.S. policy. Elections
that took place under U.S. threat and what the U.S.
was virtually saying to the Nicaraguan people is that if
you don't vote for UNO then the War and the
economic sanctions are going to continue. And what the Soviet
Union has done on the other hand to be respectful
of the sovereign decision of the Nicaraguan people. And they
were respectful of our taking up the challenge of realizing
undergoing elections under conditions that were extraordinary. So these were
neither fair nor just conditions for the Sandinista Front. And
then in that sense the people did not have much
of a range in which to choose. Yet you believe
that the elections were free and fair and that the
people expressed their true will? Yes, the people did have
the right to put forth their choice, but the fact
is the context in which these elections took place was
one of having a gun to the head of every
Nicaraguan. Secretary Baker said the Contras should disband, Mrs. Chamorro
said so, you said that should happen prior to April
25th. The Contras have responded that they will not disband
before the inauguration of the new Government. What do you
think of that position? That is extremely serious because that
threatens all of the security of the entire country. And
indeed it is contrary to the decision I have just
taken to order a cease-fire in order to facilitate the
disbandment of this mobilization of the Contras so that they
can come home and that indeed we could have peace
and tranquility by April 25th on which the transition date
will take place. What great difference would it make if
the Contras disbanded now versus waited until April 25th? First
of all, there is an agreement among the Central American
Presidents that has been abided by Nicaragua, but that has
not been respected by the Contras. And then there is
the security which we must insure of all those people
who voted for us and that indeed amounts to over
40 percent of the electorate and they feel threatened by
the Contras especially now that the opposition has been victorious.
So we have to insure the security for these people.
That is a very important issue, I think that you
say that it is the critical issue. Can that be
negotiated and if it is not negotiated to your satisfaction
will you take the kinds of actions some describe such
as strikes making the country ungovernable? Well, as long as
I am President, I am going to take whatever measures
are necessary to insure the defense of our country and
the security of each and every citizen because the alternative
would be a civil war. And indeed it would be
terrible when we have made so much progress that we
should be confronted with that. So all Nicaraguans have to
join hands along with the United States in order to
clear up this Contra matter once and for all. You
have asked for no further offenses against the Contras. If
the Contras should be involved in some offensive of some
kind are you saying that you would take action against
them? This morning what we have done is ordered our
troops to halt any offensive operations in order to allow
the Contras to demobilize peacefully but if they choose not
to demobilize then I will have to take other steps
because my obligation is to insure the safety and security
of every Nicaraguan. Can that issue of demobilization and when
be negotiated successfully? Well, we feel that it has to
take place before April 25th. If there is not war
between armies, the Contras and the Government Army, some fear
war in the streets among party members from both sides
that could perhaps escalate in to something more serious. Do
you fear that? Here in lies the importance indeed of
the talks that are going on between the respective transition
teams. On our part General Ortega and on the other
part UNO Mr. Antonio Lacaia. So when there the items
in relation to the future of the Interior Ministry and
the army are being dealt with because this is something
all Nicaraguan have a stake in because these institutions are
for the security of every one. When will the negotiations
begin in earnest and are you happy so far with
the talks? Well the talks began yesterday and indeed we
published a statement that they had began and the respective
transition teams have been named and they are going to
continue meeting regularly. They used to ask us to act
with flexibility, with realism, and with maturity. Now we are
asking them to act with realism, flexibility, and maturity. When
some look at the events in Eastern Europe and the
events here it has been said that there is an
anti-Marxist tide in the World. Your response. There is no
anti-Marxist tide here. It is rather that you have enormous
reaction here to the War to the crisis which has
been posed by the United States on the Nicaraguan people.
Because you have to take in to account that the
Sandinistas continue to be the strongest and largest single political
party in Nicaragua which is a far different situation which
you have in Eastern Europe. Does the election have significance
will it effect things in Mr. Castro's Cuba? We in
our relations with Cuba we have Party to Party relations
as we do with a number of Parties as we
do have with members of the Socialists International. I can't
speak of the attitude that the Cuban Government is going
to assume with respect to the new Government. Were you
personally saddened by the results for your own relations with
the voting public? Yes it was a difficult situation but
I had always been convinced that there was a real
risk of losing the election. And what is really important
here is not who won the Sandinistas or UNO. The
important thing was that the elections did take place and
that those elections should be free fair and clean and
we Sandinistas managed to accomplish that objective. What is the
political future of Daniel Ortega? I continue to be with
the people with the Sandinista but I am now going
to be working on a different basis and we are
going to govern from the law sort of speak to
defend what we have won the revolutionary conquests to demand
that UNO comply with all those programs that it said
it was going to do in behalf of the people.
We will support everything in the UNO Government that appears
toward the national interest, toward the people's interest. You said
we leave the scene victorious. What do you mean? Because
the Sandinistas never sought out to create a one party
state and there were elections here in 1984 but these
in 1990 were even more important. If indeed we were
put to the acid test our commitment to democracy and
the best proof that we met this test was the
election and the results. You see if we had won
the elections there would have been those that would have
called fraud, there had been intimidation, that it had not
been fair but now as a result of these election
results what you have indeed is the consolidation of democracy.
Thank you very much for joining us Mr. President. Still
ahead on the Newshour indicting Exxon and Medical malpractice. Now
the criminal case against the Exxon Corporation. It was brought
yesterday in Anchorage, Alaska, in a five count indictment growing
out of last year's Alaska oil spill. It charges Exxon
with willfully and knowingly allowing unlicensed employees and others known
to be physically or mentally incapable to operate the tanker
Exxon Valdez. The company said yesterday it will fight the
charges in court. If convicted, it could be fined more
than $1 billion. Exxon also faces more than 100 civil
suits. Neither Exxon nor the Justice Department accepted our invitation
to debate the case tonight. In their stead are two
lawyers who disagree about the wisdom of filing criminal cases
in such matters. Robert Adler is a senior attorney with
the National Resources Defense Council. The NRDC filed court papers
to oppose any plea bargain for Exxon. Richard Samp is
chief counsel for the Washington Legal Foundation. Mr. Adler, does
Exxon deserve to be treated as a criminal in this
matter? Absolutely. Our Congress has seen fit to provide in
our laws that corporations can be held criminally accountable for
environmental pollution. This was one of the major, most damaging
pollution incidents in U.S. history and they ought to be
held accountable. Normally, a criminal case is based on malicious
intent or whatever. Do you believe that that is the
case in the Exxon case? Well, I don't think that
Exxon deliberately intended to spill 11 million gallons of oil
into Alaskan waters, but it was clearly a highly negligent
operation that allowed this to happen and that allowed it
to be cleaned up almost not at all. If you
drive a car negligently and kill someone in the process,
you are held accountable, and the corporation should be held
as accountable as you or I. Mr. Samp, is Exxon
a criminal? They certainly are not. We would certainly with
Mr. Adler that it's important that Exxon be held accountable
if, in fact, it's been negligent in this case. But
the proper way to hold them accountable is to bring
civil actions against them where in the context normally used
in matters of negligence, their conduct can be judge. Criminal
liability is wholly inappropriate in cases where simply negligence is
charged. Why is that? Well, first of all, because we
have an understanding in our society that when someone is
branded a criminal that they are being branded as somebody
who has done something extremely wrong that they need to
be marked as someone who's highly culpable, and I don't
think that's true in this particular case. Secondly, the implications
to any corporation or any corporate official who is convicted
of a criminal charge are very huge in terms of
the ability of a corporation to survive after that point,
and we think that the punishment doesn't fit the crime.
Mr. Adler, what about this criminal intent business? Nobody when
somebody is accused of murder or burglary, it is usually
on the grounds that they intended to commit the murder
and they intended to burglarize. And even you concede in
this case that Exxon did not intend to spill the
oil. What's the difference here? Well, there are many analogies
in criminal law where we punish people under criminal statutes
for conduct which is not malicious and not deliberate. If
you negligently run a red light and you kill a
pedestrian in the process, then you can be prosecuted for
involuntary manslaughter under the criminal law. Even if there is
no intent obviously to run over the person at the
red light. That's right. And the point is that we
are punishing irresponsible conduct and we are deterring that person
and anyone else in society from engaging in such conduct.
Now Exxon was recklessly operating a tanker holding 50 million
gallons of oil in dangerous waters. They should be held
accountable just as you or I would for such conduct
driving an automobile. Mr. Samp, is that not a good
analogy between careless and reckless driving of a car versus
careless and reckless driving of a tanker? I don't think
so at all because first of all, we're talking about
criminal charges against a corporation and in the case of
a corporation, you're not going to send the corporation to
jail. It's just a matter of how heavily you're going
to be fining them, and in this particular case, Exxon
is certainly going to be deterred from any negligent conduct
in the future. They've already spent more than $2 billion
in the cleanup effort. They have paid compensation of close
to $200 million to residents of Alaska, including the fishermen
there. They are the subject of hundreds of civil suits
that have been filed against them, so I think it's
a little bit naive to suggest that there is no
deterrence in this case. Are there precedents for this kind
of action, Mr. Adler, an environmental disruption of this kind
that resulted in criminal charges, where there was not the
criminal intent to begin with? Certainly there are. When the
Ashland Oil Company spilled oil into the Ohio River two
years ago, the federal government brought criminal charges and successfully
settled that case. Let's talk about the notion of bringing
criminal charges against a corporation. Corporations in this country argue
all the time that they should have the same rights
as individuals, property rights, due process of law. If they
have the same rights, they have the same responsibilities as
well and they cannot be held above the law any
more than an individual. And yet in this case no
individuals, no individual executives or employees of Exxon were indicted,
just the corporation, so there is a difference. Up until
now, no individuals have been indicted. We think as a
matter of fact that the investigation ought to proceed and
if any individual corporate executives are found to be individually
responsible, then indictments ought to be brought against them as
well. How do you feel about that, Mr. Samp? Well,
obviously, the corporation can only act through individuals, so for
the government to prove its case, it's going to have
to prove that certain individuals at Exxon were negligent and
criminally so, so that obviously the government by bringing an
indictment against Exxon believes that there are people who are
criminally negligent out there. I think that if the government
realizes that it would be bad public relations to indict
the lower echelon employees who would be probably the ones
who would have known something about the Exxon Valdez, and
since this case is probably all a political show to
begin with, they realize that it was better just to
leave it at the corporation. A political show to begin
with, what do you mean? Well, it seems to me
that this administration has made it clear that it wants
to be tough and perceived to be tough on environmental
polluters and they have been pressured by environmental groups to
bring criminal -- Like Mr. Adler's? Exactly -- to bring criminal charges
in this particular case and they realize that if they
failed to do so, they would be charged with coddling
environmental polluters. Do you agree with that version of motivations
here? We did not bring any direct pressure on the
Justice Department to convene a grand jury. What you should
remember is that it was a grand jury of citizens
like you and me who decided that it was appropriate
to bring Exxon to justice. It was not due to
pressure from environmental groups. Let's talk about the message that
this indictment -- it will all come out in the wash
in the courtroom as to whether or not Exxon is
finally found guilty, but just the indictment, itself, what message
does that send to American business and industry, Mr. Adler?
The message, and an appropriate message at that, is that
we will not tolerate conduct that causes severe damage to
our natural resources. Is that a new message? That is
a new message in the magnitude. Again, there have been
other criminal indictments. We would encourage the Justice Department to
pursue this indictment aggressively, to send that message very forcefully.
What's your view of the message here? I would agree
that that's the message and I think it's an unfortunate
one. It seems to me that all of a sudden
in this country it's become fashionable to see environmental preservation
as the sole goal of issues that affect the environment.
I think that that's an admirable goal. I think that
preserving jobs is also an admirable goal. If we continue
to penalize American business the way that this administration appears
to be starting to do, we are simply not going
to continue to be competitive in the world market, and
it seems to me that the inevitable result is we're
going to be losing jobs in this country. Mr. Adler.
Well, let's be realistic here. Exxon Corporation posted major profits
last quarter despite the accident, despite the amount of money
it spent on the cleanup. We're not going to put
Exxon out of business, we're not going to put a
single person out of a job, but we will send
a message to the corporation and its shareholders that if
it wants to make a profit, it has to do
so by abiding the law. Do you agree, Mr. Samp,
do you agree with Mr. Adler that while this is
huge and its magnitude is still not precedent shattering, that
there have been similar cases brought, similar criminal cases brought
in environmental matters? There have been similar cases, most of
them have been in recent years, and that's what very
much worries me. I certainly agree with Mr. Adler that
Exxon is not going to be put out of business
by this particular case, but some of the companies who
are being charged criminally in recent years are being driven
out of business. There is a client of our organization
whose crime was removing rubbish from a dump, replacing the
holes with clean fill dirt, and he's now facing a
three year jail sentence for this and his auto repair
business is being closed down. And those are the kind
of cases that particularly worry me. Do those kinds of
cases worry you, Mr. Adler, that this thing could get
out of hand? What worries me is that despite many
years of civil enforcement of environmental laws we still have
widespread non-compliance. Let me give you an example. According to
the General Accounting Office, a recent study, four out of
every ten industries who discharge toxic waste into the nation's
sewer systems are violating their discharge permits despite civil compliance.
Obviously, we don't have enough deterrence, and without this sort
of action corporate America is not getting the message that
it has to comply with environmental laws. Do you think
this sends the new message though on those kinds of
cases as well? I think it does to all corporations
who are responsible for complying with pollution laws if pursued
aggressively. Your concern, Mr. Samp, is that it sends a
double message, it may send a message to the bad
guys, but it also sends the wrong message to the
good guys as well? Exactly, and it seems to me
that, as I stated before, that this is not a
reasonable environment in order to allow business to thrive in
this country, that I would certainly agree that there are
appropriate circumstances under which criminal law should be enforced. For
example, it seems to me that any company that goes
out in the middle of the night and takes drums
full of toxic waste and dumps them in a park
and does so knowingly and intentionally, that sort of corporation
ought to be indicted. But we're not talking about that
kind of case here. We're talking about a corporation which
had no intention of spilling any oil, did so, perhaps
through its own negligence, and now they're finding themselves in
a criminal court. All right. Mr. Samp, Mr. Adler, thank
you both for being with us. Thank you. Thank you.
Next tonight new facts and the new debate about medical
malpractice. A major study released today found that thousands of
hospital deaths and tens of thousands of injuries each year
are the result of negligence but that relatively few victims
ever file malpractice claims in courts. The study conducted by
Harvard researchers examined one state, New York, that drew conclusions
with implications for a malpractice insurance system nationally. The study
was based on New York hospital patients in 1984. It
found more than 27,000 patients were treated negligently in hospital,
6,630 deaths were due in part to negligence, but only
one in eight of the patients injured by negligence actually
sought compensation and filed malpractice claims. These figures fuel an
already heated debate over what can be done to cut
malpractice insurance costs and improve medical care. Pres. Bush spoke
last week to doctors at Johns Hopkins University about the
impact of malpractice lawsuits on medical care. And I ask
you today to avoid the understandable urge to practice defensive
medicine, where doctors fearing litigation too often dictate treatment that
is unnecessary, where the threat of lawsuits threatens the very
research that is so desperately needed to save lives, and
in return, we've got to restore common sense and fairness
to America's medical malpractice system. Restoring common sense to the
system is the subject of a proposal in this week's
New England Journal of Medicine. The article calls for implementing
a no fault malpractice insurance system. The no fault system
would take cases out of courtrooms and set up expert
panels to compensate victims. We turn now to reaction to
today's study and a debate over the no fault solution
proposal. Dr. David Axelrod is the New York State Commissioner
of Health. He commissioned the Harvard Report today and is
one of the leading proponents of the no fault insurance
solution. Harvey Wachsman is a physician and practicing lawyer. He
is president of the American Board of Professional Liability Attorneys.
He's on the faculty of Brooklyn Law School and the
University of South Florida College of Medicine. Dr. Axelrod, what
is the surprising finding in your study, the large amount
of negligence, or the small amount of claims? I think
it was rather the small amount of claims. A previous
study done at Stanford approximately 10 years ago identified roughly
the same percentage of adverse events, that is injuries to
patients that occurred that would lead us to have believed
at least that the number would be approximately the same.
There is a concern I have with the data that
are being presented and that is that this is an
extrapolation from the review of some 30,000 charts to over
2.7 million discharges in 1984. So to say that numbers
of thousands of individuals who are identified as having died
represents an extrapolation from 1,100 cases in which injury was
identified in the Harvard study. I see. It's like a
poll. In other words, you've taken a sample and you're
saying that represents that reality? That is correct. Right, like
a blood sample. Yes. Okay. Why do you believe there
are so few malpractice claims arising out of so many
cases of negligence? I think in many instances, the patient
is not aware of the fact that any negligence has
been committed. I think there are difficulties in accessing what
is otherwise identified as an officious system with respect to
the individual person. I don't think that the average person
believes that there is much chance of success. An individual
who comes from a lower socio-economic background may not feel
that he has the wherewithal or she has the wherewithal
to pursue a malpractice suit. There is no clear indication
that our system is geared to one of social responsibility
with respect to payment for medical injury and it leads
more to an event that looks like entering a lottery
with respect to a return with a medical malpractice suit.
Do you share Pres. Bush's belief that fear of malpractice
claims, that doctors hold of malpractice claims, is distorting the
medical delivery system? Yes, I believe that there is a
distortion which is occurring. I think it's occurring in a
number of different areas. The most important of them may,
in fact, be the unwillingness of physicians to participate in
peer review of their own colleagues. That fear I think
has removed an important element of maintaining the quality of
healthcare within our institutions. Without full participation of physicians, it
is not going to be possible to have a full
review of what happens and the manifestation of quality that
we would like to have. I do believe there is
a cost impact associated with the practice of defensive medicine.
I don't know what it is. It's been estimated to
be 5 percent or 10 percent or 15 percent in
various studies. How does that come about? Doctors because of
their concern for their ultimate testimony in the event that
they should be faced with a malpractice suit attempt to
go to the nth degree with respect to the ruling
out of diseases. There is an error of commission in
many instances with respect to reaching the 99.9 percentile in
terms of likelihood of a given disease by some very
expensive tests. We have a broad armamentarium of diagnostic tests,
evaluative procedures that are available to the evaluative procedures that
are available to the medical profession, and the physician may
choose to utilize one or many of them or all
of them in an effort to assure himself that he
is not going to be subject to litigation by virtue
of his failure to have done a single test. Okay.
We'll come back in a moment. Dr. Wachsman, do you
dispute the findings of the survey? I think the survey's
findings of enormous of amount of malpractice in this country
is true. I think that there are numbers of physicians
who are alcoholics, drug addicts, psychiatrically impaired. According to the
AMA 7 to 9 percent, or thirty to forty thousand
physicians in this country are impaired. Obviously, that would cause
an enormous amount of malpractice which does cut across this
country, and you extrapolate those numbers, that comes out to
about 100,000 people a year die because of malpractice in
hospitals alone. This was a study of hospitals, not even
doctors' offices, and hundreds of thousands of people are injured.
The reason for the great disparity between the numbers of
lawsuits and the numbers of malpractice is clear. It's due
to deception and fraud practiced by physicians and hospitals in
this country, misleading patients, so that they do not know,
and they are misrepresented to in a wholesale manner by
physicians so that they cannot find out what exactly occurred.
There's also changing of records, forgery that goes on on
a national level, that's as significant as well. But for
those patients who do find out and do know or
suspect there's been malpractice, Dr. Axelrod said they don't claim
because they think they're throwing themselves into a lottery. It's
not so. First of all, those people who are significantly
injured or, in fact, were injured, they win the cases
because they're meritorious. In our office, we just heard before
from Dr. Axelrod, there's very few wins by patients, not
so. In our office, more than 90 percent of the
patients who come to us, who we actually bring a
lawsuit for, we win, and although we only take about
3 percent of those patients who actually call or contact
our office in order to bring a suit. Do you
agree with Dr. Axelrod and the President that doctors fearing
malpractice are practicing defensive medicine and that that is raising
the cost of healthcare? That's absolutely untrue. That's something that
has been propagated by medicine and also obviously misled the
President into thinking that there is so much defensive medicine
going on. There is none essentially, because no test that
does not help a patient or at least find the
diagnosis or help elucidate the diagnosis for that patient in
no way assists the physician in defending himself. And the
truth of the matter is, that most malpractice is not
due to the 99 percentile test but is due to
three things, one, the physician not showing up, two, I'm
talking about seeing the patient and evaluating him rather than
over the phone or showing up some other time, two,
is not taking a proper history, which takes time to
evaluate a patient and 80 percent of diagnosis is made
on history, and three, is not doing a proper, a
physical examination. 70 percent of all malpractice cases across this
country are due to a physician not showing up, not
taking a proper history, examining, and if you look at
that, I think any patient is entitled to those things
and not due to some test that somehow he didn't
do. Those cases we have wide experience, we've written three
volumes in the area, it's not so. You say it's
not so, but you wouldn't agree with the cartoon, with
the sort of folk wisdom that's in the cartoon in
the New Yorker recently where a doctor is saying to
a patient, well, I think it's just a common cold,
but let's run a full battery of tests just to
be sure? No, because that's just not true. Again that's
misrepresentation. There have been a lot of things in history,
as you're aware of, that have occurred and knowledge that's
pushed around and stated when, in fact, it's not true.
The truth is that there is no great defensive medicine.
The only defensive medicine that does exist, which I do
agree with, is when a physician spends more time with
his patient, talks him and examines him over a longer
period of time, and, therefore, can see less patients per
hour and therefore, there's a cost to that physician because
he can't make as much money. But it's certainly not
due to tests. Two quite different points of view on
this. Now, you are in favor of replacing the present
system with a no fault system. Can you explain briefly
how that would work and why it would improve things,
in your view? I think the first difficulty is that
you've been talking about the Harvard study dealing with medical
malpractice. The Harvard study did not deal with medical malpractice.
The Harvard study dealt with medical injury and the nature
of that injury and the extent to which negligence was
responsible for that injury. Only 1 percent of the cases
that were reviewed by the Harvard study demonstrated negligence, so
that what we have tried to do is to define
our terms a little bit better. We are concerned with
a social system which provides justice to those who are
injured by virtue of their contact with the healthcare system.
Our concern is that the medical care system is a
hazardous one in terms of your entry into that system
because of the nature of the interventions, and that there
is a distinct possibility for injury. The no fault system
which we are proposing would have a mechanism by which
individuals would be paid on the basis of the nature
of that injury if there was causality established, rather than
fault assigned to a given physician. It would not be
necessary for an individual to become a plaintiff within an
adversarial system in order to be compensated for the injury
which occurred. Well, who would decide whether they were at
fault, the office or hospital -- It would presumably be a
panel of individuals who would be expert with respect to
the nature of those injuries, it would work similar to
worker's compensation where those who make decisions with respect to
occupational health would make a judgment. Why would that be
an improvement over the system now? Because as it currently
stands, the Harvard study demonstrates that only 1 in 10,
approximately 1 in 10 individuals, who have been injured as
a result of negligence ever receive any kind of compensation.
There is nothing to suggest that there is any equity,
that it's an effective system with respect to compensation for
medical injury. I think what we have to do is
to separate what it is we're trying to do. Are
we simply trying to provide a small number of individuals
that has no relationship to the nature of the injury?
In other words, big awards, millions of dollars? Big awards
as opposed to providing everyone who suffers an injury that
is significant with a level of compensation that is relevant
to the nature of that injury. Why wouldn't that be
an improvement on this system? I think first of all,
all it does is grant immunity and that's what they're
really interested in. The whole purpose of the study was
not to see to it how they can compensate people
better but to gain immunity. I can point to Virginia
and New Zealand which has no fault. In New Zealand,
since January 1, 1988, they have a brain damaged baby
circumstance -- No fault -- -- no fault system, and they're going to
compensate all these children, the total number of children in
two years and two months that have been compensated is
zero. In New Zealand, there's no fault system where a
patient has to prove their case to an official of
the government. That just doesn't occur, because they can't do
it. One little comment that Dr. Axelrod mentioned in passing
was the word "causation". The word "causation" means proximate cause
under the law. That is the most difficult thing for
a malpractice lawyer who's capable to prove in any case.
No patient will ever be able to prove it by
themselves. In other words, this is just giving the doctors
immunity because you'll never pay anybody because the doctors will
never admit if they review themselves or a committee reviews
them, they'll never admit that there was malpractice. But we've
confused two very different things. We've confused physician discipline and
deterrence with an equitable system for compensation for medical injury.
Both Dr. Wachsman and I would agree that there needs
to be a better disciplinary system. I do not believe
that there is any data that would suggest that the
existing malpractice system represents an effective deterrent. That was one
of the elements of the Harvard study and I think
that there is, if any presence of deterrence, it's very
limited. But his point is that the system you're proposing
would represent no deterrence at all. Oh, no, oh, no,
hardly. I mean, he instances no compensation for birth damaged
babies under the Virginia's no fault system and the inability
of patients in New Zealand under their system to gain
any admission of malpractice. Well, there's, I don't want to
get into other systems, because I think that there are
complexities about the New Zealand system which has been in
place for 15 years that, in fact, has not had
an effective deterrent system. The Virginia system has been in
place for one year in which there has been any
experience, and I don't know that that is an appropriate
time frame in which to judge the effectiveness of the
program. What I think you have to do is identify
the fact that we have not been as good as
we think we have been with respect to oversight of
physicians. I think that there needs to be a whole
new arena in which we evaluate the effectiveness of the
oversight of government, the failures of the existing physician peer
review process, the failures of the hospital review process, but
I think that the most important thing of all that
will challenge the effectiveness of any malpractice system, any no
fault system even, will be the new information that is
emerging. One of the major revolutions that has occurred is
the availability of information with respect to outcome, with respect
to procedures within institutions, procedures done by physicians. I am
firmly convinced that it is the public, it is the
advocacy of the public, it is the public requesting information
that is going to change the medical practice in the
most imaginative way possible. I'm sorry, gentlemen, but that is
the end of our time. Thank you both for joining
us. Again, the major stories of this Wednesday, Nicaragua's Sandinista
government declared a unilateral cease-fire in the war against the
contras. On the Newshour, Pres. Ortega said if the contras
refuse to disband, he will do what is needed to
defend his nation. And after five previous attempts, NASA successfully
launched the space shuttle Atlantis. Good night, Robin. Good night,
Jim. That's the Newshour tonight and we will be back
tomorrow night. I'm Robert MacNeil. Good night.
