content
Good evening. Here are the top news headlines today. Moscow
threatened to deploy anti-satellite weapons in space. The Farm Credit
Administration, the biggest farm lender, said it needs financial help.
South Africa's currency, the rand, fell sharply. Delta Airlines is
suing the FAA for negligence in the Dallas crash that
killed 135 people. More details of these stories in a
moment. Jim Lehrer is away tonight; Judy Woodruff is in
Washington. Judy? We focus most of the NewsHour tonight on
AIDS, the disease that is fast becoming this country's number
one health concern. A leading AIDS researcher will separate fact
from fiction over just how contagious the disease is and
how it spreads. Next, a debate on whether AIDS victims
should be isolated from society and on whether civil liberties
are being violated by an AIDS blood test. And, finally,
a documentary report on the farm credit crunch, and the
prospects for a multibillion dollar bailout by taxpayers. Moscow said
today it will feel free to deploy anti-satellite weapons in
space if the U.S. goes ahead with the planned test
of an anti-satellite rocket. President Reagan authorized such a test
last month, saying it was needed to match Soviet development
of similar weapons. The Pentagon said today the Air Force
would go ahead with the test later this month. Two
years ago, then-Soviet leader Yuri Andropov announced a unilateral moratorium
on the testing and deployment of anti-satellite weapons. Today the
Soviet news agency Tass said that if the U.S. held
tests, Moscow would consider itself free of the unilateral commitment.
Tass said the United States' decision was "An action leading
directly to the start of a new class of dangerous
armaments--strike space weapons." Judy? Officials of the nation's largest
farm lending system say that it will collapse unless it
gets a huge infusion of federal money. In a dramatic
turnaround from his statements over the past few months, Donald
Wilkinson, the head of the Farm Credit Administration, told the
Wall Street Journal the system can no longer absorb its
losses and is in immediate need of a federal bailout.
The system has out some $74 billion in loans, eleven
billion of which are said to be uncollectable. At a
news conference today, Agriculture Secretary John Block said that he
was not surprised by Wilkinson's comments, but gave no hint
of what, if anything, the Reagan administration is prepared to
do. We don't have the options all laid out, and
we're certainly not prepared to lay them out for the
public at this point in time. And, frankly, I don't
even think the Farm Credit System has all the options
laid out. So right now we're monitoring it on a
daily basis. We watch with interest and we listen to
and talk to the governor of the system, but it
is vitally important any system that provides more than a
third of the credit to American agriculture, seventy-some billion dollars,
it's vitally important that that system not only survive--because
survival, of course, is important--but I want farmers to
survive too, and farmers can't survive with 16% interest. They
need to have competitive interest rates. Secretary Block said the
farm credit crisis has been discussed at three or four
Cabinet meetings, but indicated it's too early to know what
action may be taken. House Speaker Tip O'Neill said today
that President Reagan "doesn't give a damn about trade problems,"
that O'Neill said are costing the nation thousands of jobs.
Speaking at a swearing-in for a newly-elected congressman from Texas,
O'Neill blasted several of Mr. Reagan's policies and said popular
support for him isn't what it seems. He's high on
the polls. He's still high on the polls personally, as
a fellow that they like him for his leadership ability.
But I am seeing a sentiment there that I haven't
seen before, an anti-Reagan policy sentiment is developing across America,
from big business who are fighting the tax bill, who
don't like his tax equalization bill, to the trade bills
that they see out there. And to express the views
of many people as far as trade is concerned, I
keep hearing the fact that America is losing 3,500 jobs
a day. And after the incident of his refusing to
go along with the commission on shoes, they're saying the
President doesn't give a damn. School reopened for millions of
children across the country, but not in parts of six
states where teachers were on strike: Illinois, Rhode Island, Michigan,
Pennsylvania, Ohio and Washington. The largest number of children affected,
430,000, was in Chicago, where late today the teachers tentatively
agreed to a settlement on their dispute over wages. Delta
Airlines disclosed today that it is accusing air traffic controllers
of negligence in a crash that took 135 lives. The
Delta Lockheed 1011 crashed on August 2nd while approaching Dallas-Ft.
Worth airport during a severe thunderstorm. In the suit, filed
in federal court in Dallas, Delta said the controllers were
responsible and the Federal Aviation Administration should pay part of
any damages that might be assessed against the airline. In
another suit, the family of one of the victims says
the Delta crew slowed the aircraft down too much to
maintain control. Conceivably, Delta is now blaming that on the
air controllers, but the court papers do not say that
specifically. The Food and Drug Administration today made it possible
for the tranquilizer Valium to be marketed at a cheaper
price and under its generic name, diazepam. The FDA gave three
companies the right to market Valium, ending a 22-year monopoly
by the Hoffman-LaRoche Corporation, whose patent on the drug expired
earlier this year. At a news conference today to announce
the move, Health and Human Services Secretary Margaret Heckler said
this means that nine of the ten top-selling drugs in
the U.S. are now available in generic versions. In California
today, Rita Lavelle, the former head of the Reagan administration's
Environmental Protection Agency Toxic Waste Superfund, was freed from the
federal prison at Pleasanton. Ms. Lavelle called her six-month sentence
for lying to Congress "an awful experience." She also claimed
she was innocent and declared that she would try to
prove that. At this point in my life I'm forced
to admit that if certain politicians want to destroy and
discredit you, they can and will use any means, and
seemingly can achieve any end. In spite of all that's
happened, I'm still a loyal American, a proud patriot; however,
love carries with it responsibilities to point out wrongs and
weaknesses, to make corrections, to ensure that our republic is
the best possible democracy. My attorneys, the Bierbauers, have filed
an appeal with the Supreme Court. The appeal raises a
number of important questions, not only for Rita Lavelle, but
also for all American citizens. South Africa's currency came under
new pressure today. The rand fell 11% against the U.S.
dollar, but recovered after intervention by the central bank. In
New York the bank's governor, Gehrard de Kock, said South
Africa might have to pledge its gold reserves to meet
the debt crisis. He told a press conference that the
crisis was caused by just two or three U.S. banks
refusing to renew maturing loans. To meet the situation South
Africa has frozen debt repayment for four months until it
can reschedule the debts. In South Africa there was further
rioting overnight and again today. Three people were killed and
at least 40 wounded. At least 14 people were killed
and 46 wounded today when a car bomb exploded in
a Christian community in eastern Lebanon. The blast came in
Zahle, the only major Christian center in the Syrian-controlled Bekaa
Valley, and officials said they did not know who was
responsible. And, in Beirut, fighting between Shiite and Palestinian soldiers
around a refugee camp left five people dead, including two
Shiite children. In Egypt tonight, a surprise cabinet resignation. Prime
Minister Kamal Hassan Ali resigned without giving a reason. President
Hosni Mubarak named Dr. Ali Lotfi as his replacement and
asked him to form a new cabinet. Lotfi was Egypt's
finance minister under the late President Anwar Sadat. One of
the major problems facing the Mubarak government is Egypt's huge
foreign debt, now in the $25-billion range. That concludes our
news summary. Coming up, a major focus section on fear
of AIDS. Should victims be isolated? Should people known to
have AIDS exposure be tracked? Then, a documentary update: the
mounting crisis in the agency most farmers borrow from, the
Farm Credit Administration. We devote the major part of our
program tonight to a look at the mounting public concern
over AIDS, a disease that has already afflicted just under
13,000 people and claimed 6,481 lives. With no cure, treatment
or preventive vaccine in sight, some citizens are taking drastic
steps to protect themselves against infection. Correspondent June Cross has
this background report. All most people know about AIDS is
that it kills and now, as the disease spreads, the
fear of catching it is spreading even faster. Here in
New York City, which accounts for one-third of all AIDS
cases, healthy citizens are beginning to react angrily to the
idea of having AIDS patients living in their midst. These
people try and tell me it's not contagious, and I
know it's different or else why would a nurse or
a doctor put a mask on when they go into
their rooms to take care of them? This man didn't
like the news that the city planned to place ten
AIDS patients in the nursing home where he lives, and
he was not the only one upset. The residents in
this Queens, New York Community successfully blocked the city's action.
These people, they are sick people, and they belong in
city hospitals. They don't belong in a home for the
elderly. It's not just adult AIDS patients who are raising
concerns. Parents are worried that their children might contract the
disease from playmates who have it. Last week, a school
board in the Queens area of New York said it
would prohibit children with AIDS from attending school. The mayor
of New York, conceding that schoolchildren could pose a risk,
on Friday announced a new city policy. Before a child
with AIDS would be permitted to enter the regular classroom,
that child will be examined to determine whether that is
appropriate for the child, whether that's appropriate for the child's
classmates. Fear of the disease and a desire to isolate
its victims is not just a New York City phenomenon.
Seventh-grader Ryan White of Kokomo, Indiana, is a hemophiliac. Last
December he got the AIDS diagnosis. Now he has to
attend school from the other side of a telephone. Ryan,
do you find that in your book? Yeah. His family
is suing the local school system to get him back
in the classroom. That case is still pending. AIDS patients
are not only being kept out of the classrooms; they're
being fired from their jobs. Gar Traynor used to work
as a flight attendant with United Air Lines. A San
Francisco resident, he was diagnosed as having AIDS two years
ago. A week after my diagnosis, I informed United, and
if I was going to be taking chemotherapy for the
cancer it may involve some schedule conflicts. That was fine,
there was no problem until six months later I was
called into the office at eight o'clock in the morning
by one of the supervisors and told, effective immediately, that
I was on a medical leave of absence. And this
was their choice, not mine. In a letter to Traynor,
United officials stated, "The exact method of transmission is in
fact not only controversial but at this point in time
conjectural. Since the bulk of the duties as a flight
attendant involve food and beverage handling, it was felt that
in the interests of United's flying public that you not
perform those duties as a flight attendant." Traynor filed suit,
and the matter was solved through arbitration. He was reinstated
with $24,000 in back pay, but in the meantime his
deteriorating health has kept him from resuming his work. Whether
the patient is an innocent schoolboy or a homosexual man,
the AIDS diagnosis is a kind of scarlet letter that
shuts them off from human company. Robert, 32, is an
arts professional in Seattle, Washington, who was diagnosed with the
disease seven months ago. When you get AIDS you're already
in a weakened condition, you know? I mean, your entire
system is weakened, and to have this--I mean, I
hate to use the term, sort of witch hunt kind
of attitude on it, it's so inhumane I can't believe
it. Anti-AIDS fervor in Washington State has grown so strong
that one group in Tacoma is calling for all AIDS
patients to be quarantined. We're not talking about discriminating against
gays. We are talking about discriminating against someone with an
infectious disease. We discriminated against lepers. There is a leprosarium
in Carville, Louisiana. Until they are no longer shedding mycobacterium
leprae, they are there. The Christian fellowship group that Dr.
Newman belongs to not only wants to isolate victims but
to publish their names in the newspaper. And I don't
care whether he's homosexual or heterosexual or whatever he is--
As soon as he's diagnosed? Yes. This should be made
public knowledge. Yeah, that's really charming. You know, that was
one of the things that I realized when I heard
the diagnosis was the--I would not have wanted to
have the job of telling people what was going on
with me taken away from me. It's akin to, say,
some dog having rabies, okay. This is something that we
can die from. This is not anything that you can
go to the doctor and you can be cured for
it. If it was, you know, then we wouldn't have
this problem. But, see, what we have to have is
these individuals that have AIDS, okay, they're going to have
to face the fact that it's like they're carrying around
a gun. AIDS patients like Robert are increasingly feeling quarantined,
even without any formal laws dictating it. To protect those
like him, the city of Los Angeles last month passed
the nation's first ordinance aimed at prohibiting discrimination against AIDS
sufferers. But, given growing public opinion against them, AIDS patients
doubt they'll stop being victims any time soon. Here now
to tell us just what is known about how AIDS
is spread is Mathilde Krim, a leading AIDS researcher and
head of the AIDS Medical Foundation. Dr. Krim, we know
AIDS is contagious. Just how is it spread? AIDS is
contagious strictly through the transmission of a virus, which passes
from one person to another during sexual intercourse or with
contaminated blood. It is not contagious at all through casual
interaction with people in normal social conditions such as living
in a household with a patient or meeting patients on
the bus or on the working place or in school.
But now, what about these reports that we've seen recently
that the AIDS virus has been found in teardrops and
in saliva? Yes, the AIDS virus has been found in
such body fluids, but it is not transmitted through them.
The only body fluids that have been found capable of
transmitting the AIDS virus have been blood and semen so
far. So you can absolutely rule out any other form
of contact or contagion other than the blood or sexual
contact, is that right? People like me in research or
in medicine base their opinion on facts. The facts we
know are those I mentioned. We don't know of any
other facts. So for the time being I can say
categorically that AIDS is not transmitted through casual contact or
through other body fluids, but sexual secretions or blood. All
right, let me ask you this. We hear over and
over that it's homosexuals who are at the highest risk,
and yet we've also read that in Africa men and
women have AIDS, apparently in almost equal numbers. Can you
shed light on that? Well, this is a very puzzling
situation in this country and in Europe. You are right.
In Africa AIDS is a venereal disease which attacks men
and women in equal numbers. In this country it has
been reported first in the gay community, and a little
later on among I.V. drug users and now, as we
heard, among other people, recipients of blood transfusions, certain children
born of women infected with the virus that makes people
susceptible to AIDS, and among a few people in the
general population who don't belong to any of these at-risk
groups. The only conclusion we can come at is--the
conclusion I came to is that the AIDS virus must
have been brought into this country either by a person
infected or blood that was infected and given, transmitted to
a gay man. Now, the gay male community is closed
from the standpoint of sexual interactions. Gay men have sex
with each other. And therefore the virus spread among them;
they became infected first. This must have been in the
late '70s, the early '80s, and they became the first
victims with clinical symptoms of AIDS. Since then, since about
a few months ago, we have had a blood test
which can track the spread of the virus infection in
the population. Several groups, different groups of people, have been
studied in this way, and we know now that the
virus is present at a low level, but present in
the general population. So in this country too this virus
is catching up with all of us, and we must
absolutely do something to stop its further spread. Based on
what you know--now, we just saw a report where
a man was fired from his job as an airline
flight attendant, where a child was being kept out of
school, another person, or a community, was opposed to having
a center set up for AIDS victims to live. Are
these actions justified based on what you know? No. These
actions are ridiculous and reflect only ignorance and fear due
to ignorance. AIDS itself is not transmitted. It is the
virus that renders people susceptible to AIDS that is transmitted
in the way I explained earlier. To segregate patients with
AIDS, with clinical symptoms of AIDS, does not protect anybody.
It causes a lot of heartbreak and injustice and does
not protect anybody. In fact, patients with clinical AIDS are
less infectious than people who have the virus and have
not yet developed clinical symptoms. But how do you reassure--
So it does not accomplish anything, quite the contrary, it
would provide a false reassurance. Everybody should be careful about
not contracting this infection, but it is not contracted through
living or rubbing elbows with patients with AIDS. And you
feel you can reassure everyone who's concerned with those--Yes,
very strongly so. Dr. Krim, stay with us. Robin? Despite
the reassurances we've just heard, the debate is not likely
to subside. Civil libertarians are becoming alarmed over what they
see as unjustified discrimination against AIDS victims, but even some
medical doctors worry that the general public is not being
adequately protected. Dr. Helen Singer Kaplan is one such physician.
She heads the Department of Human Sexuality at the New
York Hospital Cornell Medical Center. We also have with us
civil liberties lawyer Joe Tom Easely. He's the chairman of
the board of the Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund,
a group that provides legal services to the homosexual community.
Dr. Kaplan, first of all, what do you say to
Dr. Krim's remark that it would not be productive, it
would not protect anybody to segregate victims suffering from AIDS,
or to isolate them? Well, I have tremendous compassion for
"Bob" and some of the other people there, but as
I'm sitting here I can't wonder how many men have
they had sex with? How many men have they killed
with sex, how many people have they infected? And I
completely agree with Dr. Krim. The public has been kept
absolutely ignorant. We can prevent the further spread of AIDS.
There doesn't have to be a single new spread today
if we use the knowledge we have. Men like that--
male homosexuals have far more sex, more partners, than heterosexuals.
They may have as many as 500 to 1,000 a
year, and if a man doesn't know he's carrying the
virus, he can by himself spread it wildly. Let's confine
this to the moment for people who are known AIDS
sufferers at the moment, and we'll come to the people
who might be carrying the virus later. Do you believe
they should be isolated, quarantined, segregated? No, but I have--
some are still having sex with other people, and I
certainly think that is horrible. So they need to be
educated. Yes. They need to be educated. Educated, not segregated?
Yes. What do you think on this question of isolation
or quarantine, the things that were suggested, for instance, by
that group in Washington State? Well, I would like to
very strongly endorse what Dr. Krim said. It is a
matter of education and not a matter of segregation. The
kinds of hysteria that we're seeing, the kinds of responses
to a mounting national hysteria I think are dreadful. The
kind of incidents that we saw on the taped segment
a moment ago are just the tip of an iceberg.
At Lambda Legal Defense Fund we get every week, dozens
of calls not only from AIDS patients but from friends
of AIDS patients, acquaintances of AIDS patients, all of them
being discriminated against because they either have AIDS or they
are a friend of someone who has AIDS. We have
cases of people who have lost their jobs. We have
cases of people who have been thrown out of their
housing. We have cases of people who have been denied
social services, people that have been denied funeral services. people
have been denied the most rudimentary--Life insurance? Life insurance.
This kind of discrimination is widespread, and I think in
the last several weeks, in the last two months it
is increasing greatly. Do you think that it is hysteria
that is influencing the facts, or supposed facts, about the
spread of AIDS that is influencing public policy in places
like Mayor Koch's decision in this city that some children
should not go to school depending on the individual case?
Absolutely. The initiatives of segregation and discrimination are totally without
scientific basis. As Dr. Krim says--Dr. Krim is head
of the interferon laboratory at Memorial Sloane Kettering, one of
the most prestigious cancer institutions in this country. She is
expressing the view that has been repeatedly expressed by the
Public Health Service, by the National Institutes of Health, by
the Centers for Disease Control, every responsible scientific researcher in
the field of AIDS says exactly what Dr. Krim said.
This disease is not spread by casual contact. You cannot
get it by sitting next to somebody on a bus,
going to school with someone, living next door to someone,
having any kind of casual contact. Dr. Kaplan, as a
doctor yourself, and hearing the argument that Dr. Krim has
just made, do you think that hysteria is influencing public
policy? Yes, but I think the hysteria has been created
by a news blackout, by an obfuscating of the facts.
The gay community has fought long and hard for their
civil rights, but I think they were misguided in fighting
against the test. We can't give the test in New
York. It's not available. Half the cases in the world
come from New York. I think that if a gay
person has been exposed, he should want the test. And
if this were known, if the facts were known, there
would be no hysteria. The hysteria is due to a
lack of education and knowledge. Let me comment on that,
if I can. I think that is exactly wrong. First
of all, the gay community has nationally been at the
forefront of trying to encourage the federal government to spend
money on AIDS research. There have been millions of dollars
raised within the gay community itself to provide social services
to gay people who have AIDS. There has been a
very strong response, I think, from the community to press
the federal government, and there has been a foot-dragging on
the part of the federal government. First of all, as
far as the test goes, I think you're incorrect, Doctor,
in that the test is available here in New York.
Anybody who wants the test can get it here in
New York. There is no problem at all with that.
What is your view on the test being available here
in New York? Yes, the test is available for research
purposes. For research purposes, but not--so Dr. Kaplan is
right, it isn't generally available? It's available for blood, and
fortunately the gay community has been wonderful in raising money,
and there's been an unprecedented medical breakthrough in three short
years, and--We're going to go on to this question
of the test in a moment. I just want to
clear up, because there are many people living who have
children of school age who will be--the children went
back to school today, and presumably this is a question
in many people's minds. Are you absolutely sure that no,
with the categorical reassurance you gave earlier, that it would
not be dangerous for any child with AIDS to go
to school? That in cases where there were children who
were less controllable or something, who might be involved--or
where there could be bloodshed or students scratched or bitten
or whatever might happen in extreme circumstances--that in no
cases it would be dangerous for other children to have
an AIDS victim in the school? I think it may
be dangerous for the AIDS victim, because AIDS victims are
very susceptible to infections, and schools are notoriously sources of
infections for parents and siblings and so forth. So it
may not be appropriate for AIDS children to be in
school. But, yes, because AIDS patients can go through long
periods during which they are really not too sick, they
don't need to be hospitalized, they can very well function--
work, go to school. I think under the circumstances children
should be allowed to go to school. Do you agree
with that? I bow to Dr. Krim. It certainly sounds
right to me, yes. And do you believe as a
civil liberties lawyer in this case that the case of
the young boy in Kokomo, that his civil rights are
being somehow violated or abused by being prevented from going
to school? Absolutely. Absolutely. Dr. Kaplan talks about the AIDS
victims as if they're all gay men having sex with
500 people a year. Tell that story to the 13-year-old
in Kokomo, to the six-year-old in New Haven, Connecticut, to
all of the heterosexual women--There are about 180 children,
I believe, known to have the disease at the moment.
Yes, that's right. I think it would be of interest
to the public to know that most of these children
are infants born to mothers who were infected, and they
come down with clinical symptoms of disease several months after
birth. And many of them don't live beyond the age
of five years. I mean, so far most of them
have not lived beyond that so that the question of
school for them hardly exists. Most of the children of
older age who have AIDS--and there are very few
of those, I think there are seven in the whole
of the New York City school system--are boys who
were born with hemophilia. As a treatment for this genetic
disease they need to be given blood or blood products.
By mischance, in the past before we had the test
to keep the blood pool clean of the virus, some
people, including some of these children, have received contaminated blood
and are now infected and have developed AIDS. But these
are older children of an age where you can explain
certain things, you know, and they know they are sick,
and they can very well behave in such a way
as not to cause any danger to anyone. Let's move
on now. We'll come back. Judy? AIDS victims are not
the only focus of public fears. There are also those
who show no symptoms but have been exposed to the
virus and may be contagious. These people can now be
identified, as we've just heard, by a blood test. June
Cross examines the test's implications. It's known as ELISA. It
can't actually isolate the AIDS virus itself, but it can
detect whether someone's been exposed to AIDS by indicating the
presence of antibodies trying to fight the disease. It's been
proven so effective that the Pentagon announced last week that
it would be administered to new recruits. Since it's certain
now that AIDS can be spread directly through blood transfusions
and since in time of war, or even in times
of smaller mass casualties than war, we rely on direct
transfusions from one soldier to another in the field, and
therefore couldn't screen out those who might have this antibody
and could therefore endanger the lives of wounded soldiers, this
was a simple, prudent, conservative medical step to take. Aside
from the military, blood donation centers and special testing sites
for high-risk groups are screening people for the AIDS antibodies.
You've given before? Yes. Okay, I'm going to ask you
all sorts of questions. While the blood test does seem
to provide a high degree of security for blood recipients,
the most recent evidence is that only 10% of those
with the antibody itself will ever die from the disease.
It does not prove he's infectious to somebody else. It
does not prove he's going to come down with AIDS.
On the other hand, we're really not able to guarantee
that none of those things will happen. A score of
companies are working on a test that would be available
in drugstores. The first of these should be on the
market before the year is out. Meanwhile, the test itself
has raised a whole set of thorny issues surrounding what
could happen to those whose test turns out positive. Your
employer may find some way to get rid of you,
or you may not be hirable, or your insurance company
will no longer carry you because the costs involved in
treating people with AIDS are phenomenal. So far, only very
small insurance companies in California are dropping AIDS patients from
their rolls, but the gay community, already stigmatized by this
disease, is fearful that test results could end up in
the wrong hands. We are so scared, we just don't
have any trust in the government. I don't. I have
absolutely none. Neither does anybody in the gay community. Every
time lists get made that are supposed to be confidential,
those lists somehow end up in the places they're not
ever intended to be. So, on the one hand, I
see it being vital and useful. On the other hand,
I see it being as a vehicle to further discriminate
against people who are not the most acceptable in our
society. In most states the results of the AIDS blood
test are by law strictly confidential, but Colorado public health
officials think that information from the blood test can be
put to use in preventing the spread of AIDS. Here
to explain the plan is Dr. Thomas Vernon, executive director
of the Colorado Department of Health. Dr. Vernon, how exactly
do you want to use the results of this information?
Well, we want to use the information the way we
have used positive laboratory tests from many other diseases for
a very long time. We have about 30 laboratory tests
which are reportable to the state health department to go
into our confidential files. The point is that we need
to get on with it in terms of AIDS, doing
what we know how to do, what we have done
well for many, many years with other diseases--measles, Colorado
tick fever, syphilis is the best analogy. So who then
would you be getting the results from, the blood test
results from? Well, the blood tests would be reported to
us from any laboratory in the state which does the
blood test by law. And, incidentally, by law these are
confidential tests. We have years of experience with our system
of confidentiality and there has been no break in that.
All right, before we get to the question of confidentiality,
why are you doing it? We're doing it because--at
least a couple of reasons. One is we don't have
a vaccine for the disease. We don't have a definitive
treatment for the disease. What we do have is the
ability to provide adept and skilled counseling to individuals who
have it. We need to think of counseling as our
modern-day vaccine, at least for the short term. The second
reason is that I think we need to be demonstrating
to the American public that we are doing at least
as much for AIDS as we know how to do
and are already doing for many other diseases. Well, what
exactly do you mean? I mean, once you get the
names, what will you do? Will you go out and
contact these people or what? Well, again, syphilis is the
best analogy, and we've been using our ability to contact
individuals with syphilis as a means of controlling that disease
for at least 15 to 20 years. Our laboratory report,
for example, will come in to us with a physician's
name on that report. Our practice is to contact the
physician who has submitted the report and determine what are
the circumstances of that patient and does that physician need
assistance? Would it be helpful to that physician for us
to assist in contacting the patient? If the physician has
it under control, then so be it. There's no reason
for public health to be further involved. Would you make
an attempt, for example, to contact any sexual partners of
a person identified as having the virus? I think in
the occasion we would when there was evidence of a
particular spread. One example that I think is of importance,
because it may illustrate a form of this disease which
is absolutely preventable, and that is that infection in utero.
Our ability to get counseling to the, for example, bisexual
male who is married to a woman in the childbearing
age or who has had sexual contact with a woman
who may be pregnant or may want to become pregnant
may in fact result in the prevention of an in
utero infection. It seems to me that that's an extremely
important outcome. You say you are certain that you can
keep these names confidential. How can you be so sure
of that? I mean, that, after all, is what we've
just heard so many members of the gay community are
concerned about. Well, not only are we certain because of
the system of file protection and locks and staff work
that we have, but we have a history of success.
We have not had, and have never had to, release
information to insurers, to employers, to law enforcement agents, to
the general public, to family members. We simply don't release
the information. We have enough experience that I think we
can say with a great deal of confidence that this
will not occur with our AIDS reports. What argument do
you use to the person who thinks he may have
been exposed to AIDS to risk, you know, losing confidentiality,
when he knows there's no treatment, no cure, for a
disease that he may have? Well, the argument is, to
the high-risk group as well as to the general public,
we have some skills to bring to bear on this
disease that may help. It may help you as a
high-risk individual. It may help you understand better the disease
and your ability not to transmit it further. The fact
that we have now a blood test which is a
major advance over where we were only six months ago,
a disease with a one- to five-year incubation period. We
now have a lead on an individual who could be
infectious for many years before they in fact would come
down with the disease. Dr. Vernon, stay with us. Robin?
Mr. Easely, what do you think of the Colorado plan?
Well, it's difficult to argue against something that is so
plausibly scientific. It is an appealing argument that how can
you argue against a test here that can lead to
another scientific miracle, adding another magic bullet to the arsenal
of the ones we already have? But let's look at
this test and find out exactly what it is showing.
Unlike what Dr. Vernon said, and I think he would
agree if asked on this, that this is not the
kind of test, like a syphilis test or the kind
of other test, that will show you whether or not
you have the disease. This test is going to identify
a very large number of people, only 10% of whom
are likely to ever come down with AIDS itself. So
the people who are identified positive by this test--first
of all, everybody will not have the disease, and of
those who will ever in their lifetime get the disease,
they're only going to be 10%. Now, the federal government
has taken the position--the FDA in its licensing of
this test, has taken the position that this test has
no diagnostic or therapeutic value for AIDS at all, that
it is a screening test and screening test alone. Now,
the kind of issue that's come up in Colorado has
come up in other states as well. New Jersey just
finished examining the same issue, whether or not the state
health department should in effect make a positive report on
the test reportable; New Jersey decided against it. There's a
great deal of controversy in Colorado about this, I might
say. The head of the largest blood bank in Denver
was opposed--So what are you saying? They should--What
I'm saying is the problems involved, the problems that are
inherent in the reporting of this kind of test, greatly
outweigh any advantage in terms of therapy or scientific research
right now to giving of the test widely. Do you
agree, Dr. Krim, that using the test in the way
Dr. Vernon described could help prevent the spread of AIDS?
I think there are better ways to prevent the spread
of AIDS, and the better ways are to inform the
public on exactly how AIDS can be transmitted from people
to people. The best--you see, the test--as we
just heard, the test identifies people exposed to the virus,
not people who are sick. Can I interrupt one moment
to clarify a piece of information for me? If 100
people have been exposed to the virus but only 10%
of them may later get AIDS, are the other 90%
carrying something communicable? Yes. Yes. They are carriers of the
disease even though they may not get the disease themselves?
They are carriers of the virus, not the disease. Of
the virus, I beg your pardon. And can they communicate
that to other people? Yes, they can, if they remain
ignorant and not aware of their being infected and not
aware of how they can transmit the disease. This is
why the test, we were just saying with Dr. Kaplan,
that the test should be available to everybody. And the
people who would request it done would be people who
have reasons to believe that they may have been exposed,
and it should certainly be available to them. So that
they can adjust their life, their lifestyle, their behavior accordingly,
and become, you know, protect others that they deal with
sexually. What do you think of Colorado's plan to--I
am appalled at the obfuscating that just because 10% come
down--that's not why we give the test. We try
to identify carriers, and the fact that there was political
pressure in New York City, I have to send my
patients to New Jersey to get the test. This is
exactly where the test should be available. I would think
that any person who's been exposed in good conscience would
want to be tested so they don't kill their loved
ones. But what about the use of the test that
Dr. Vernon--I completely agree with Dr. Krim that it
should not be mandatory, but it certainly should be widely
available and the gay community should encourage the use of
it rather than having put political pressure to stop the
use of it. Yeah, but there are reasons why the
gay community for a long time recommended that its members
not avail themselves of the existence of this test, and
the reasons are simply that the gay community is a
community, is a group in our population that can legally
be discriminated against, and they had very good reasons to
think that as long as they were the major victims
of this disease and this infection, the test will be
used to identify gay men and discriminate against them, and
we know that this is happening. What--let me go
back to Dr. Vernon with Mr. Easely's point that the
problems and complications of the use of the test outweigh
any advantages you might be able to derive from using
it the way you propose? Dr. Krim and Dr. Kaplan
are absolutely correct. This test is far more than we
thought it was when it was first released six months
ago. It is not just a screening test. In the
Red Cross studies, 60% of those individuals with a high
antibody against the AIDS virus were culture-positive. These are individuals
who are carrying the virus and who are infectious for
others. We're talking about our ability to get information to
people who don't otherwise know what to do with their
blood test results or with their sexual behavior. With all
that, doesn't it make it logical for as many people
who suspect they may have had contact to submit to
the test? It's logical for there to be the widest
possible education program in the community, in the gay community
and in the heterosexual community about the dangers of AIDS
and the kinds of safe sex that people can engage
in. But the problem with this test--But you're shaking
your head violently. There's no safe sex. There's no safe
sex. There is safer sex. Safer, but there is no
safe sex. They have to stop having sex or only
have sex with other people who are positive for the
virus. That's rather impractical advice to give to everybody because
I believe that everybody should be educated, not only the
people in the high-risk groups. And it's true. There is
not absolutely safe sex, but there are certain practices that
certainly reduce greatly the danger of becoming infected. I'm afraid
that we've spent a lot of time on this but
we have come to the end of it, and we
have to leave it there. Thank you all. Thank you,
Dr. Vernon, in Colorado; Dr. Krim, Mr. Easely and Dr.
Kaplan in New York. Judy? Hopes to ease the federal
budget deficit and administration plans to move farmers to a
freer market suffered a severe setback today. The head of
the nation's largest farm lending institution, the federal Farm Credit
Administration, says that his agency needs federal help to keep
it afloat. Donald Wilkinson told the Wall Street Journal the
Farm Credit System cannot handle the $11 billion losses that
it faces. Just weeks ago Wilkinson had insisted that the
Farm Credit System would not need a federal bailout, but
now he says that farm economic problems have outflanked his
agency's worst-case planning. The Farm Credit System is similar to
a giant credit union. It sells bonds on Wall Street
and uses the proceeds to loan money to individual farmers
through a series of district banks. It is a system
that farmers have come to rely on. Recently Kwame Holman
reported on the economic storm clouds rocking the $74-billion institution.
The biggest bank in America is in trouble, but the
people involved won't be found here in the financial heartland
of Wall Street, but in the rural heartland of the
farm belt. The largest bank in the nation is the
Farm Credit System, a giant network of farmer-run credit unions
or cooperatives that took shape during the Great Depression. With
a pool of federal money, the farmers of that era
set up a member cooperative to give themselves farm loans
they couldn't get anywhere else. Today, the system holds more
than $80 billion in loans for farmland, crops and livestock,
but now the system has a problem. American agriculture is
in its worst decline since the 1930s, and a huge
crop this fall is expected to drive down prices even
further, sapping the ability of some farmers to repay their
loans. Iowa Congressman Jim Leach. Basically the Farm Credit System
is teetering on the brink of insolvency. Because of the
losses, the system announced this week that, contrary to earlier
statements, it will need financial help, most likely from the
federal government. The announcement should be good news to farmers
like these who say that they have borne the brunt
of the pain in keeping the system solvent, and that
control of the system is being taken away from farmers
by bureaucrats of the Farm Credit System administration. This is
a crucial time for that system because the way that
system will look in the future, the basic parameters of
that system are going to be determined in the next
several weeks. How did the Farm Credit System get into
such trouble? It started in the boom days of the
1970s when crop prices and land values were rising. The
farmer cooperatives, like the commercial banks, lent lots of money
to farmers. The system, frankly, rewarded those who made more
loans. In fact, bonuses were given to people who made
more loans. That was a prescription for basically a loose
credit policy. Ray Powell was a loan officer with the
Farm Credit System in Creston, Iowa. It was just a
fever throughout the whole system to do that. I've heard
comments that people were out almost handing people money and
trying to talk them into putting up this silo or
do that sort of thing. But today land like this
is worth half of what it was ten years ago,
and many farmers can't make the payments on those loans.
Without those loan payments, local credit associations face millions in
losses. The association in Creston, Iowa, is typical. When deficits
started to pile up, the credit association here looked to
the system's district office in Omaha for help. They found
out there was a price for that help. Tom Langemeier
is the former head of the association in Creston. The
associations don't have the money to handle the problem. There
is just no way that they've got the money. So
they're looking to the district bank for money. And anytime
you ask for money and you can't control the situation
out there, there's going to be a lot of strings,
and there's an awful lot of strings. A credit institution
has to recognize that it has some borrowers who are
having difficulty. It has to determine, is it going to
eliminate those borrowers? And that has to be a decision,
a cold-blooded business decision. This is the man who farmers
say is pulling the strings, Farm Credit System Governor Donald
Wilkinson, the man who made the announcement that despite the
belt-tightening farmers have done, the system will need help from
the outside. In Creston, that sacrifice already is costing farmers
money. They are fighting for control of a system they
once thought was their friend. The struggle centers on the
production credit associations, that part of the Farm Credit System
that loans money to farmers for crops and machinery. Every
time a production credit association makes a loan, it holds
10% of the loan amount in reserve. In May, without
any warning to farmers, the Creston production credit association decided
to freeze that 10% on all of its loans. Essentially
what that means for farmers is that paying off their
loans now is going to cost them 10% more. At
the time they froze the stock, I had to sell
cattle right after that to get my loan balance down.
Farmer Leo Tucker will lose money because of the freezing
of his 10% reserve, known as Beef stock, in the
Creston association. Effectively, the interest rate on his loan has
been increased, and if he tries to buy out that
loan and move it to another bank, it will cost
him an extra $12,000. The idea of freezing stock is
to keep farmers in the system. The whole Farm Credit
System, I think, could maybe have got on top of
the situation just a little quicker. Then when they did
it was kind of an overreaction. I feel bitter against
PCA to the extent that, I mean, you know, it
just increased my debt $12,000. Governor Wilkinson, a presidential employee
or appointee, doesn't care what members want or what impact
the freezing of Beef stock or possible liquidation may have
on the member borrowers. In fact, he has done everything
in his power to take away all rights from members.
Humiliation and fear tactics have effectively neutered local boards that
are still intact. Farmers at the Creston association recently sought
the help of Iowa Congressman Jim Lightfoot in their battle
with the system's administration. When do you think that loss
of control took place? Ultimately, though, the question for these
farmers may not be who runs the system today, but
who will support it tomorrow. What's happening is that a
lot of farmers that are strong and can get out
are getting out, leaving the system with weaker credit arrangements.
At this recent meeting between Congressman Jim Leach and eastern
Iowa farmers, the talk was that higher interest rates and
stock freezes are causing an exodus of some of the
system's best farmers. The bad news has been surprisingly slow
to reach Wall Street. This is where the Farm Credit
System takes orders from investors who want to buy system
bonds, the source of the loan money to farmers. Until
recently, farm credit bonds were considered a very safe investment,
selling at interest rates almost as low as government treasury
bills, even though system bonds aren't backed by the federal
government. Today farm credit rates are rising dramatically as investors
begin to understand the system's troubles. Still, many are convinced
that the government would bail out the system if it
ever started to collapse. It will not be allowed to
fail, in my view. As a country, as a matter
of policy, we took that stance with respect to Continental
Illinois. This is about twice Continental. It's about two Continentals.
And I think it simply is too big a part
of the financial part of the country for it to
fail. The revelation that the system will seek outside revenues
was preceded by unprecedented shifts of capital inside the system
to shore up its ailing districts. The Spokane, Washington, district
was first, getting $150 million from the system last June.
Last month, the troubled Omaha district, the one that bailed
out the Creston association, got bailed out itself with almost
$350 million from Farm Credit System banks around the country.
But the system is feeding on itself, and many outside
the system say that the federal government will have to
step in to keep the system afloat. I am personally
convinced that it needs financial assistance and it needs it
very quickly, that another year's wait will be too late.
The system is not facing demise. Right now we believe
this system has the resources to handle its own problems.
To do so, however, will require that the situation not
worsen to a degree that we had not anticipated. Any
data at the Washington level are stale at a time
when values are changing as rapidly as they have been,
when you're losing up to 20% or even a greater
percentage of land value in the course of a year.
That has a very destabilizing effect, and circumstances change very
quickly. So the future of the country's biggest bank depends
in large part on the future of American agriculture. The
experts differ on what that future will be, but time
may not be on the side of the farmers of
Creston, Iowa, or the Farm Credit System. As we reported,
time has now run out for the Farm Credit System.
Tomorrow the system's board of governors is expected to announce
its recommendations to resolve the credit crunch. As far as
getting more aid, that tough political step will be up
to the administration and Congress. Robin? Once again, the main
stories of the day. Moscow threatened to deploy anti-satellite weapons
in space. The Farm Credit Administration, as we've just said,
said it needs financial help. South Africa's currency, the rand,
fell sharply. Delta Airlines filed a suit blaming air controllers
for a crash that killed 135 people. Good night, Judy.
Good night, Robin. That's our NewsHour for tonight. We'll be
back tomorrow night. I'm Judy Woodruff. Thank you and good
night.
