content
Good evening. Energy Secretary James Schlesinger today uttered the direst
warnings about the economic future unless the country replaces oil
with coal. Speaking in New York, Mr. Schlesinger said that
failure by U.S. business to increase its use of coal
over the next decade could cause the most severe economic
crisis since the Great Depression of the thirties. Ironically, as
he spoke, the nationwide coal strike, begun yesterday by the
United Mine Workers, began spreading to non-union mines. The union
comprises about seventy percent of the nation's miners and affects
about half of U.S. coal production. But union pickets started
closing non-union mines today in Ohio, Maryland and Kentucky, and
there were plans to extend the picketing to West Virginia
and Virginia. Mine Workers` President, Arnold Miller, said today that
the nation's soft coal producers want a one-month strike to
drive up prices and to weaken the union, but they
may get a walkout of three to four months instead.
Tonight, the meaning and the cost of the mine workers`
strike. Jim? Robin, money is not the issue in this
strike--at least, not money that comes in the form
of wages. The real sticking point is the so-called "wildcat"
option. The union is demanding the right for local unions
to strike single mines over local grievances. They could strike
only after a majority vote, and there would be provisions
to prevent them from spreading to other mines without further
votes. But management sees it as merely a legalizing of
wildcat strikes, something that has continually plagued the industry. They
are adamantly opposed to any such local option striking, and
in fact want provisions in the contract for docking pay
and otherwise discouraging single mine strikes. The other major issue
has to do with financing and restructuring the union's health
and retirement fund, which is now near bankruptcy. Robin? Jerry
Jones is a miner working for the Old Ben Coal
Company in Sesser--that's in southern Illinois. He's been a
miner for twelve years and is president of Local 1124
of District 12 of the United Mine Workers. The district
has between fourteen and sixteen thousand miners; Mr. Jones` local
oversees some 550 active members and 400 retired. Mr. Jones,
on the issues that Jim just outlined, which of the
three are most important to your members, the right to
strike over local grievances, increase in pay, or your health
and pension benefits? Well, Robin, first of all, I think
that the benefits are very important. Here's something that we've
always had, under the last two contracts, and suddenly six
months ago they've been taken away from us. Now that
puts us in a hole as far as going into
negotiations because here we're trying to negotiate something--President Miller
is--that we have always had; we're trying to get
back to be even before we ever start. To me,
this is a very important issue which actually shouldn't probably
even be at the negotiating table to begin with. These
benefits were taken away by some employers as a result
of a certain amount of wildcat strike, were they not?
This is what information the company has put out and
the press has reported. Actually, I don't agree with this
thing. In 1974 or late 1973, when this contract was
being negotiated, the one we're working under now, they took
in consideration the amount of coal that had been produced
in that year and they decided, here, we're going to
increase production, what we're going to do in the next
years to come under this present contract; so therefore we're
establishing our royalty fund, which is x number of dollars
per ton, plus so many dollars per man hours worked,
and then we're going to establish this fund to pay
the benefits and the health and retirement. So it's divided
into four different, separate funds. The 1950 plan, which is
the retirement fund that was in effect when it came
in in 1950 in the contract there, this is still
in. People on that fund draw like $225 a month.
I guess what you're saying is that they said the
more coal produced, the more money would go into the
funds. Well, my point is, they projected what would be
produced; in other words, an increase in production--and that
hasn't been so. The production has not increased. I think
there is a great number of reasons for this, and
they're always trying to lay that to the working miner.
To the wildcat strikes. Yes. But that isn't the only
reason, you think. No. Can I ask you one other
question? Your district did not support Arnold Miller in the
recent leadership election, they voted against him. But now you're
behind him in this strike. Can you explain, because the
owners have been saying, the operators have been saying that
Mr. Miller needed this strike himself to consolidate his leadership
of a disunited union. Well, in any election, whether it
be in labor or anywhere, you have two sides--or
this time we had three parties running. Actually, our district
supported Harry Patrick as secretary-treasurer, and he won--he got
the most votes in our district. But now let me
say that one of my close friends and fellow workers
did not support Arnold Miller; in fact, he went off
on a totally different slate, and he was very much
anti-Miller. But he made a statement to me the other
day that I thought summed it up pretty well. He
said that there was talk that they didn't want Arnold
to even be on the negotiating team because they said
he couldn't comprehend, he couldn't understand the contract language and
what was going on in negotiation. All right, if that
is so, then if they're going to write a contract
and send it down to us working miners, and if
he can't understand it there's no way we can work
with it, so we're going to get behind him. We've
got to get behind him. I see. We'll come back.
Jim? To further analyze where the union stands is a
man who has been active in coal labor management disputes
for several years, Thomas Bethell, a former United Mine Workers`
research director. He participated directly in their 1974 bargainings. He
is now editor of an industry publication called Coal Patrol.
Was this strike avoidable, Mr. Bethell? I really don't think
it was, but I don't think it's a strike that
was primarily provoked by the mine workers. I think that
the industry had a choice over the past two or
three years, as the situation developed and as labor relations
problems became more and more obviously severe, of whether they
were willing to come to the bargaining table with an
imaginative approach that would meet the needs of an obviously
very rapidly changing work force with changing expectations and demands.
Instead it's obvious, and more obvious every day, that the
industry came to the bargaining table not prepared for that
kind of approach but insisting on coming in with a
big club to go after a problem that simply is
not going to be resolved that way. Under the circumstances
it seems to me that any UMW president, be he
Mr. Miller or anybody else, would have been forced into
a situation where you now have the sides in a
strike. I think it was avoidable, but I think in
terms of the last several months, when people started focusing
some attention on it, no; by that time the damage
was done. All right. Mr. Jones laid out the basic
union position on the pension issue. Let's talk about the
wildcat issue, or the local strike issue, however you want
to phrase it. Is that a non-negotiable item from the
standpoint of the union? I suppose to an extent it's
true in any negotiations that any item is negotiable, but
the union has taken a very, very publicly strong stand
on winning this right. And it will be difficult for
the union to go back to its membership and get
ratification--this is only the second UMW contract that's had
membership ratification--without that demand in the contract unless the
contract is otherwise very, very solid. So to an extent
the union is locked in on that position. All right.
Now from the union standpoint, why is that so important,
the right to strike a local, single mine? Probably the
single most important reason is the overwhelmingly strong feeling on
the part of members of the union that there is
now no way to resolve a grievance speedily and fairly,
that it is all too easy for management simply to
postpone and postpone and postpone resolution of a grievance and
take it farther and farther away from the point of
production and more and more into the hands of people
who didn't really have anything to do with it in
the beginning; and that the local union and its members
have no effective penalty system to impose on management for
repeat violations of the contract. The right to strike could
be structured in such a way that it would not
be irresponsibly used. If it were structured in such a
way, I think, it would be used very, very rarely.
But it would be a clear-cut right to strike as
opposed to the complete mess that you have now, with
unauthorized strikes--strikes that are illegal under Supreme Court decisions
over the past several years. And everybody spends all their
time in courts as a result of it. Yeah, which
is obviously the last place to resolve these kinds of
things. Have the internal problems of the union itself, that
Robin just touched on with Mr. Jones--the election, the
whole thing with Arnold Miller reelected with forty percent of
the vote, and so on--have these affected the union's
bargaining position going into this? I think industry counted on
that happening; I'm not sure that it has happened. I
think that the very fact that the union members know
that they've been through a difficult time makes it doubly
important for them to stick together in the strike now
that the strike is under way, and the signs are
that they're going to do that and that they're going
to back Mr. Miller pretty strongly at the bargaining table.
I think industry has miscalculated that point. All right, thank
you. For a look now at management's side of the
dispute, a longtime observer of the coal industry, John Hoerr,
Labor Editor for Business Week magazine. How much does industry
stand to lose in this strike going in, Mr. Hoerr?
I think in terms of monetary loss, very little at
the beginning, because there is a tremendous amount of coal
already stockpiled. Utilities have between two to three months of
coal in the stockpiles; steel mills, two months. Data Resources
Incorporated, a consulting firm, recently did a study which indicates
that even if the strike had not occurred on December 6
the enormous stockpiles would have demanded a cut in production
of about twenty percent. So management stands not to lose
anything monetarily. I do think management stands to lose a
good deal in the labor relations sense if this does
become a bitter and prolonged conflict. In other words, there
would be no problem for a few weeks, but if
it got to be a prolonged strike for several months
then it could be very serious for them in the
industry...I'm saying it could be serious for them, I
think, in a human relations sense. Monetarily, once again, I
think a couple of months would not really hurt the
industry that much. All right. We talked about the internal
problems within the union. How unified is industry going into
this? Industry has its divisions. They are unified on what
they conceive to be the main point, in a general
sense, and that is, they feel they need labor stability,
they need an end to the walkouts--wildcats--they need
a reduction of absenteeism, they want the union to give
what it bargained for in 1974, and that is a
labor force that is on the job when it should
be on the job. So they're unified in the general
sense, but I think on how you go about achieving
that in the contract there is some disunity. Now, whether
that will result in a major loss of bargaining leverage
is unclear at this point. Well, we just heard what
Tom Bethell laid out, the union position on a "responsible"
right to strike over local grievances. What's management's position on
that? They don't want that under any circumstances, do they?
That's right, Jim. Absolutely, that seems to be one of
the specific things they are unanimous about: no right to
strike in the contract. In reply to the statement, well,
if it's a limited right and if it's done with
qualifications and so forth, why not then? Industry's response is,
if the United Mine Workers were, for instance, like the
United Auto Workers, which does have a right to strike
on a limited basis in the auto industry over certain
kinds of issues but it has a lot of political
discipline--if the United Mine Workers were that kind of
union, it might not be so bad. But the industry
worries that with the long tradition of honoring anybody who
goes out and pickets a mine, even though the local
votes not to strike, suppose a guy goes out and
pickets the mine anyway and the fellows refuse to cross
the line. That's industry's worry. That's exactly, of course, what's
happening with the closing of the non-union mines now, is
it not? I mean, there are people who are not
members of this union who are honoring picket lines and
closing down the other mines. Oh, sure. This generally happens
in a strike time, especially in the non-union mines that
are adjacent, in Appalachia, to the union mines. These people
live close together, and it's a bowl of ferment. Let
me ask you both, back to you also, Mr. Bethell,
and then I want to bring you in too in
a moment, Mr. Jones: how is this thing likely to
be resolved? Let's take this issue of single mine strikes.
It seems to me from what both of you have
said that there's not a whole lot of room for
give there. Where's the resolution going to come? Well, I'm
not sure that I can predict where it's going to
come. I think...Where is there room for give, let's
put it that way. I think that both sides to
a remarkable degree are locked in where they are now,
much more than you would expect at this point in
time. Obviously the nature of negotiations is to give on
both sides. The union probably could modify its position on
the right to strike if it were fairly sure that
no punitive clauses were going to wind up in the
contract penalizing those who strike or those who are absent
without an excuse, which I think actually is probably more
of an issue to the industry than the wildcats themselves;
it's really the question of whether you can count on
somebody being at the mine every day. But it's not
clear at all that they're going to be able to
get that kind of an agreement. Let me ask you,
Mr. Jones, speaking for you and your local and your
view of this particular issue, are you willing to give
on this? Do you see any room in there for
negotiation, or are you adamant? Well, first of all, I
don't think we've touched on in the whole thing about
what a right to strike is, in limited form. What
we're talking about is what Tom got on there a
little bit about making a quicker way of handling grievances.
Now, the way I see a limited right to strike
to be would be, say we've got a problem at
the mine site. We go in and talk to management.
Management says, "Well, you know, let's slide it up, we'll
just arbitrate it." This is the way it happens now.
We go into an arbitrator, who actually doesn't know what
goes on in a coal mine. And to give you
a good example, the company is able to go hire
qualified and very competent people to write these grievances for
them. They're wrote up as a legal document. At the
company I work for, the personnel man had a degree
in psychology plus a degree in law. Now, how am
I, with a high school education, going to write a
grievance that would do justice to my fellow worker when
I have to go against something like this? So if
we had a limited right to strike, then the company
would say, "Okay, if we don't handle this problem and
try to make a sincere effort to settle this thing,
the mine is going to go on strike." See, I
can go back to my people and say, "Okay, if
a majority vote, then we're going to walk, we're going
to come out." In other words, your answer is, you
want the limited right to strike and if it's not
in that contract your people aren't going to support it,
is that right? I would say so, yes. But what
I'm trying to say is that the whole picture is
not just the idea that we're going to be out
here stopping coal mines, stopping mines from working; this is
what's happened now. And I think there would be less
strikes, less problems. Of course, Mr. Hoerr, that's not the
way management sees it at all. Is there any give
in their position? They're not going to handle even a
limited strike--they're not going to accept that, are they?
They say that they would take a strike over that,
which they are doing right now. You know, they have
made other proposals to in effect penalize--although they call
it "reward" workers for being at work all the time.
But it's very difficult not to call it a penalty,
because what it amounts to is in any biweekly pay
period if a person is absent because of a strike,
the rest of the time he is at work he
only gets sixty percent of his regular wages. And if
he's absent for any other kind of unexcused reason, he
gets only seventy percent of his wages. And yet a
further kind of penalty is a striker would have to
pay back into the health and welfare funds a total
of twenty-two dollars a day, that being his assessment. Let
me ask you, then, John, you're as familiar with the
labor side of this as you are with the management
side; where do you see the give? I think Tom
Bethell pointed out an obvious place for tradeoff. Now, whether
that will happen or not I don't know. Neither one
of us is sitting at the bargaining table. That is,
if management is willing to move off this business of
penalizing people--and I think a lot of union people
are really very disturbed about that; I've talked to rank
and file miners who feel that why should the management
have the ability to penalize if we don't have the
ability to penalize them for violating the contract? Meaning, the
right to strike. That's right--well, no, but why should
one side have the ability to penalize if the other
side doesn't? And I think if this is put out
for ratification, for instance, a lot of miners will take
this very common sense point of view. And union officials
I talk to are very worried about getting ratification of
any contract that has this kind of provision in it.
So the question is, can the union move off the
right to strike; can industry move away from this penalty
system? All right. Robin? Yes. Mr. Jones, your union leader,
Arnold Miller, said today that the strike might last three
to four months. Could your members hold out anything like
that long? Let's tick off the things: you have no
strike pay, right? No. In the union. There's no strike
fund. In many states and, I believe, yours in Illinois,
you do not normally qualify for unemployment insurance if you're
on strike. That's correct. Your health benefits have stopped with
the strike. Yes. How are your guys going to hold
out? Well, I would say that most of the people,
with the exception of maybe the very young miners who've
just started, have known for quite some time that we
were going to have a strike this time because we
could see from the way things were going, just like
Tom Bethell pointed out, that we were headed directly into
a strike. So therefore we have prepared ourselves to a
certain extent. Of course, it takes a lot of money
to keep...You mean you've been saving? Sure; we've been
saving money. A miner's basic pay now is about sixty
dollars a day, right? That is the official basic pay.
Yes, it's about average. What can a miner make who's
sort of working full-time, in a week now? Basically, in
a week--I'm using my mine for an example--we
produce coal five days a week, and then we work
the idle day on Saturday, which doesn't mean everyone works;
I'll say about seventy-five percent of people work...What's the
average take-home pay, would you say? Okay, I would say
that would be, before check-off, somewhere around three hundred seventy-five
to eighty dollars. I see. So they've been able to
save out of that. So you think they'll be able
to hold out for some time. Your own members, would
they be able to hold out? I think it'd put
a hardship. Don't get me wrong, I think that we'll
have to adjust our way of living. But if it
comes down to a heads-up battle, which it looks like
it's going to--and to me there's no reason for
this--I think that we'll stay behind Arnold. Jerry, you
were shaking your head a while ago when in Washington
Tom Bethell was talking about the amount of coal that
industry has stockpiled. Do you not believe that it's stockpiled
as much as it says it has? No, sir, Robin,
I don't really believe this, because all their figures that
the BCOA has put out and the company has put
out, they say production's down this year, we're not producing
coal; so therefore, where are they getting this coal? Of
course, I realize that there's been some increase in production
in the West, but this is a different quality of
coal than what we have here. You've got to have
the coal from Illinois, the coal from West Virginia and
the areas out here to mix with this coal to
have the amount of BTU`s. Tom Bethell, how accurate are
the figures on the coal stockpiles? Are you satisfied with
them yourself? That was John Hoerr who gave those projections...
I beg your pardon. But I would have to agree
with him. I do think, though, that there is a
tendency to exaggerate the amount of time that a strike
will go on without impact on the basis of saying
there's ninety days of coal on the ground. If the
utility gets down below, say, a thirty-day supply, it goes
into a state of cardiac arrest about what it's going
to do. So when will the crunch begin to be
felt, and in which parts of industry first--either of
you; Mr. Hoerr, do you have a view on that?
You know, the steel industry is very depressed on a
worldwide basis, and one of the strange anomalies was that
as late as last week before the strike started, the
high-quality metallurgical mines in southern West Virginia were on two
and three-day weeks, even before the strike started. So it
shows right there that the steel mills don't really need
very much coal, even on a worldwide basis. And so
I don't know, I would suppose that the utilities, given
Tom's cardiac arrest principle, would be the first to feel
it. What about private users of coal? Are there still
many schools and buildings and things heated by coal that
would begin to feel it sooner who mightn't have been
able to stockpile enough? Tom? I think the answer to
that really is no, in terms of a statistically significant
amount of coal. You only have about eight percent of
current production going into that particular market. I see. In
other words, Tom, have those people been right who over
the last month have been in effect discounting this strike
because unlike the days when John L. Lewis could practically
bring the country to a halt with a nationwide coal
strike, it is not going to have that effect immediately?
I would say that they are only partially right and
that that is not entirely true in the sense that
the major mines in the country, the major deep mines,
all the metallurgical mines are UMW mines. They will continue
to be UMW mines into the foreseeable future. And they
determine the pattern of production in the country even though
it's true that you have a lot more production now
coming out of the West from nonunion surface mines. But
it's absolutely true what Jerry said about the differences in
the quality of the production coming out of the West
and those other variables. Even though the UMW accounts today
for only about sixty percent, incidentally, not fifty percent...Thank
you....of production, that sixty percent is critical to the
country. In Jerry's area, for example, if you're just talking
Illinois, they control more than ninety-five percent of the production.
So anybody who's talking about consuming Illinois coal is talking
about consuming UMW coal. In West Virginia, which is where
your real heavy trouble spot is and has been for
the past three years, that's about ninety percent UMW. So
when you segregate by market or you segregate by type
of consumption or type of production, the UMW is still
basically the only game in town, and the operators, if
they attempt to ignore that fact, I think are buying
themselves three, five, or whatever many more years of terrible
labor relations with some major consequences for the country as
a whole. So Mr. Hoerr, is all this discounting of
the effects of the strike a bit of psychological warfare?
To some extent, sure; that always goes on. I think
Tom is right that the operators would be unwise to
rely on that. But I would like to point out
that you brought up the subject of John L. Lewis
and how he seemed to have what commentators used to
call a "stranglehold" on the country. Back in the forties,
I believe some eighty percent of all production was controlled
by coal; indeed, in 1933, if you would believe it,
ninety percent of production was controlled by the UMW. And
Tom makes some valid points about the segmented markets, but
even in Appalachia today--in Ohio and Pennsylvania, for instance--
less than sixty percent of the coal produced is UMW
coal. And that's a rather startling figure when you think
about what you normally think of as traditional UMW strongholds.
Do you fear, Mr. Jones, finally, that this strike may
actually have an effect of weakening your union over the
long run? Are you worried about that? Actually, I'm not
worried about that point. I don't believe that it's going
to weaken the union. I think that actually if you
want to break it down that the BCOA, the operators,
are having more problems than we are internally. Every day
there's some companies that's talking of dropping out, wanting to
negotiate separate contracts. Now, that's not good from our standpoint
as far as we've got to spread out and we're
going to have to be working under more than one
nationwide agreement. We'd rather be under all one agreement. But
this points to the fact that the BCOA does have
problems, too, internally. Thank you. We have to leave it
there. Thank you both very much in Washington. Thank you,
Mr. Jones. Good night, Jim. That's all for tonight. I'll
be away for a few days starting tomorrow, and sitting
in for me here will be Charlayne Hunter-Gault, who joined
The MacNeil/Lehrer Report this week. Thank you. Good night.
