content
The Chinese have a bold dream--to transform their country
into a modern industrial state by the end of the
century. But the China of today is still much like
any developing nation: short on skills, technology and capital. To
acquire them, the Chinese Communists are doing some very un-Marxist
things. Good evening. Early next month China will open its
first official trade exhibit in this country. Businessmen in San
Francisco, Chicago and New York will get a hard sales
pitch on products of China's industries. Since relations were normalized
last year, the two countries have had an unequal partnership
in trade. Right now, the U.S. is selling three times
as much to China as it's buying. But the Chinese
are determined to turn that 'round, and with it their
standard of living. It's all part of China's much-publicized Four
Modernizations Policy announced in February `78. By rapidly modernizing industry,
agriculture, technology and defense, the Chinese hope to increase per
capita income from the present equivalent of $150 to 1000
U.S. dollars a year by the year 2000. The Chinese
leaders have taken an interesting first step to motivate greater
production. They are permitting a significant amount of old-fashioned capitalism.
Recently they allowed a team from the BBC to film
some examples. So, tonight an unusual glimpse of China's new
business spirit. This report appeared on the BBC`s "Money" program.
The reporter is Paul Barry. If the Chinese have got their
figures right, one quarter of the world's population lives in
China. The national income per head is only 150 U.S.
dollars a year, scarcely higher than India, and the sort
of money a Westerner might spend in a weekend. But
you don't see beggars on the streets. If there's no
job or house for you in the city, they send
you to the countryside to work on the land. And
you go, because China is a very disciplined society. Each
year there are 12 million more mouths to feed, 12
million new pairs of hands to keep busy. It's a
miracle that they can raise living standards at all. To
give these extras jobs in industry would mean building 6000
new factories a year. That's the scale of China's modernization
task. When you look at China's industry, it's like going
back in time, revisiting the Industrial Revolution. Never mind that
it looks worse in parts of Wolverhampton, some of these
factories are China's pride and joy. The Far East Fan
Factory, near Canton, is one of them. There are 1500
factories in China making electric fans, and this is one
of the most modern. It turns out 60,000 fans a
year to cool the hot spots of Africa and the
Far East, and the assembly line makes it look bang
up to date. But when you get to the process,
you begin to have your doubts. Isn't this more like
"do-it-yourself" than mass production? And the further you look, the
stranger the story gets. This man is counting fan parts
to be sent into the countryside. There they will be
rubbed smooth by peasants and then brought all the way
back to the factory for painting. It's a crazy way
to run a business. But China has its own way
of doing things. This year, the factory plans to raise
output by a staggering 50 percent. How? Well, it's easy
really. We first tell our workers we are going to
produce more, 30,000 fans more, and then every team in
the factory guarantees that it will fulfill its quota. We
try everything we can to encourage the positive attitudes of
the workers, and we all apply greater effort. Some of
the workers will carry out technical innovation to improve their
equipment. There are many projects among the different units, but
we're all trying to produce more than our quota, and
that's how we do it. Like many factories in China,
this one desperately needs to modernize. Surprisingly, it did make
a profit last year, but the state took most of
it away to spend on other factories. Only 25,000 U.S.
dollars was left to buy badly needed new equipment, and
it's the same all over China. The jam is too
thinly spread. When the need for modernization is so great,
can such a pitifully small amount of money be enough
to bring factories like this up to date? We have
to modernize in two ways. One way is to make
the machines ourselves, self-reliantly. And then we also buy advanced
technology from abroad. But we can't do it all at
once. We have to do it step by step. So,
the $25,000--yes. that is enough. They have not got
money. A lot of people have taken the view that
this is another Middle East, just waiting to sort of
bounce up into the stratosphere. They haven't got enormous resources.
They've an enormous population, and they are short of money.
There's no doubt at all. So, it's going to be
a slow process. Deng Xiaoping himself said the country would
be modernized by the year 2000. In a country that
size, the communication's difficult, a lot of things are very
difficult indeed, and they are short of money. So, it's
going to be a slow progress. The cultural revolution in
China hasn't exactly helped their chances of modernization. For 10
years `til 1976--the country was frequently in almost total
chaos. Factories would stop work for months, when the Red
Guards arrived to root out reactionary thinkers. Millions of ordinary
Chinese lost their jobs or were banished to the farms
for political reeducation. Many committed suicide to escape persecution. For
a decade, political purity was paramount, and production took second
place. During the period of the Gang of Four, there
was anarchism running amok in our factory. We have tried
our best to reeducate the people, but the anarchic practices
are still there, and we have to wipe them out
gradually. We have to educate the workers to be more
disciplined and to get rid of waste, because there is
a lot of waste. So, we have to improve the
quality and quantity of our production, and we also have
to improve our management so that we can make a
better contribution to the Four Modernizations of our country. The
manager of this Canton textile factory survived the Cultural Revolution
days. Then, he was just a worker in the factory,
but now managerial skills like his are back in favor.
Before, intellectuals and educated people were struggled against and criticized.
There's an old saying of the Gang of Four, "The
more knowledge you have, the more reactionary you are." But
after the downfall of the Gang of Four, many changes
have taken place. We've reinstated three engineers and more than
20 technicians who had lost their positions. The Gang of
Four had sent them into oblivion, but we brought them
back again. The Cultural Revolution slogans have faded now. Boundless
loyalty to Chairman Mao and his thought has been rubbed
out. But for all the improvement, the same old problems
remain. China still lacks skilled labor and technicians, and the
machinery is still old-fashioned. Even by Third World standards. China
has some catching up to do. Textiles is China's biggest
industry, as in many developing countries. It earns a third
of the country's foreign exchange, and it needs to do
well to pay for China's modernization. But it lacks raw
materials, and it's not growing as fast as the planners
would like. So here, as in all factories, the new
message from the propaganda machine is going up, "Work harder,
fulfill the quotas, let's forget about the politics." And the
call to the people of China is "work with one
heart and one voice, achieve the Four Modernizations of our
country by the year 2000." But since the death of
Mao, more has changed than just the slogans. The capitalist
roaders are back in command, and they know you can
make someone die for communism, but it's harder to make
them work for it. Most girls in this factory earn
the standard industrial wage of seventeen pounds a month, but
since last year they can earn an extra seven or
eight pounds a month in bonus payments if they work
hard. And, as the cynics would expect, it's doing the
trick in raising production. And the workers like it, but
for good socialist reasons, of course. We are all very
happy with the bonus system. It's very good for production,
and it also increases our income. But we don't just
work for the bonus. We also want to increase production
and to produce better textile goods. Do you work harder
since the bonus system was introduced? Yes. of course. We
work much harder since the bonus system started, and with
much greater enthusiasm. And the harder we work, the more
the state rewards us. So, we are very happy. In
the Harrods of Canton, the motives of the bonus seekers
seem perfectly obvious. There's no reason to believe the Chinese
have a special aversion to money and consumer goods, or
that the Chinese leadership is not deliberately dangling these rewards.
At weekends and lunchtimes, the shop is packed with people lured
in by what the new consumer society has to offer.
This summer, plastic sandals, that would once have gone down
well in London's King's Road, are all the rage. There
are Chinese-made radios, too, for those with the money. But
these radios are not for the Chinese market, even though
they're assembled in a Chinese factory. They're Binatones bound for
Britain and bearing, rather strangely, the Hong Kong label on
the back. The Chinese are acting as subcontractors because the
factory can't afford to buy the parts. For the job,
they get the princely sum of eighty pence a radio,
and each worker produces just three a day and a
grand total of two pounds forty for the nation's coffers.
It seems an appalling deal for the Chinese, but it's
all part of the drive for modernization. The Chinese now
are anxious to develop their industrial capability. They are anxious
to attain their legitimate and rightful place in the world
economy by producing quality products, and they recognize that in
order to achieve those objectives, they are going to have
to accept certain basic principles of capitalism. So, would you
say they're a lot less interested in ideology than they
used to be? Most decidedly, yes. At the Canton Trade
Fair, the businessmen press in like prospectors. They're pursuing the
dream of conquering the world's biggest market, and they've come
from all parts of the globe--Japan, especially, but the
States, Australia, and Europe too. They're here because China needs
them. They have the money and the know-how that China
lacks. The businessman's dream is simple: a thousand million customers.
Sell one button to every Chinaman and you'll be a
millionaire many times over. But it has not been the
gold mine that the diggers expected. It's a simple problem.
You can't sell to people if they have no money
to buy with. And here at the Canton Fair, the
Chinese are most interested in selling. Canton is the shop
window for China to dress her wares to the world.
It's what every businessman sees when he comes, China's brave
new world, packed with machines that would make every Chinese
factory manager go green with envy. Generally, the quality of
Chinese products is reckoned to be good, perhaps even too
good for Western markets tuned to obsolescence. But it's the
style that's the problem. They don't seem to have much
of a clue about Western fashions. No doubt the idea
of throwing something away because you don't like the cut
strikes the Chinese as repulsive behavior, not socialist at all.
But if they don't pay more attention to the style
of goods that Westerners want, there will be a limit
to their sales abroad. So, more and more the foreign
textile merchants are telling them what to make. Then, supplying
them with patterns, the raw materials and sometimes even the
machines to make it with. That's what this American deal
is all about. The foreigners get their garments cheap, and
the Chinese get machines without putting down hard cash. It's
called a compensation trade deal, and it's happening more and
more in China today. The surprise is that China needs
help on even the simplest projects. Here, on Canton's waterfront,
a Hong Kong property developer and a Hong Kong bank
are putting up an ultramodern, 37-story hotel to lure tourists
into China and earn more valuable foreign exchange for the
country. It's the sort of thing you'd expect the Chinese
to be able to do for themselves, but they've not
got much experience of high-rise building, and they've even less
of running a modern hotel with the standards of service
that the cosseted Westerner expects. The project is a true
joint venture. The China and Hong Kong partners are sharing
the risk. And it's one of the first in China.
It's also the first time the Chinese have let anyone
film it. They've been strangely reticent in the past. The
hotel should be ready in 1983. The Chinese have provided
the land and labor as their stake in the project.
The Hong Kong developer and the bank bring the money,
the management, expertise and design. In return, they end up
with their share of the profits, granted that all goes
as smoothly as they expect. The risk? I believe the
Chinese are absolutely first class risks. We've been dealing, and
we've had an office in Shanghai right through the Cultural
Revolution. We've made profits, we were allowed to remit profits
out. To the best of my knowledge, all the deals
together with China's large purchase of wheat, where they've bought,
have all been settled promptly. I regard them as absolute
first class risks. Is this something we're going to see
more of? Are the Chinese committed to this policy? Yes,
they--very much the name of the game is trying
to export now, and they're very much committed to joint
ventures, and I believe we shall see many more of
them in the years to come. And how much do
they need them? What's the advantage for them? Well, the
advantage to them is to get the foreign exchange element
of a joint venture in from the foreign partner, the
expertise, and the marketing expertise, selling the products eventually abroad.
It is amazing how much they have done in the
span of seven months. Tin Fok, the developer, has the
advantage of long close ties with the People's Republic. His
father is one of the richest men in Hong Kong,
and yet also a great ally of the Communists. It's
said that Henry Fok, the father, ran guns for Mao's
army during the revolution. In any case, the Communists made
him richer by giving him the exclusive right to market
Chinese sand to Hong Kong. So for Tin Fok, making
money in Communist China is almost second nature. Basically, the
Chinese--we are a very pragmatic people, and I think
we are also business people. I think they do agree
that I don't think they enjoy the kind of exploitation
they have been getting for so long, but they certainly
know the businessman's profit is the first consideration. And with
certain faith, I think, you know, I think you can
make good, reasonable profit in China. If you have doubts
about what the Chinese are capable of under the right
conditions, you need look no further than Hong Kong. Its
prosperity rests on the most naked capitalism in the world
today, but also on Chinese who live and work here.
It's now the financial center of the Far East and
the thorn in the side of half of British industry.
The income per head is twenty times higher than across
the border, but this could be a taste of the
China of the future. Certainly, the ways of capitalism are
creeping into China wherever you look. The old China traders
say, "Put two Chinese together, and you've got a market."
And in Canton, markets are being allowed to flourish again.
Peasants in China are now allowed to raise produce on
their own land and sell the surplus in the cities.
Some will walk miles to do it. And the Chinese
leadership is discovering what many people already knew, that you
work hardest if you're working for yourself. And they're allowing
this enterprise to flourish because they realize it will speed
the country's modernization, just like incentives are doing. This is
the dream of China in the year 2000, the next
economic miracle from the Far East. But at the moment
it's just an illusion. The TV factory is in Canton,
but the tubes come from another China, Taiwan. And China
will never quite match the miracle economies of the Far
East like Korea or Singapore because it will never have
foreign money pumped in in such vast quantities. Money is
vital, and even the world doesn't have enough to make
more than a passing difference to China. And China will
surely never go all the way down the capitalist road.
Already the small steps she is taking are putting the
system under enormous strain. At the border of China and
Hong Kong, the overseas Chinese march in by the thousands
to see their relatives. And as the radios, TVs and
automatic rice cookers arrive, so the lure of capitalist goodies
makes more people want to get out. For every one
discontent that tried the home run to Hong Kong in
1976, 200 will do it today. This year, 200,000 could
succeed. And even at the textile factory back in Canton,
the tide of capitalist influence is having a profound effect.
At this meeting to decide who will get a wage
increase next year, the voice of individualism is disturbing the
collective quiet. It's not fair. Things are very hard. It's
crap. You mean that you work harder and get the
same amount of pay. I am the most skilled worker.
Arguments like this must surely shake China's socialism. By the
year 2000, some predict China will no longer be communist,
but it may combine the best of capitalism and socialism
if they're lucky. Only one thing is certain. In modernizing,
the Chinese leadership has set out to change China faster
than it has ever changed before. And for that, they'll
suffer from the old Chinese curse. They will live in
interesting times. Our country is still under the leadership of
the Communist Party. All we're doing now, is we're giving
more attention to the welfare of the individual. This will
not lead to capitalism. That report was by the BBC.
That's all for tonight. We will be back on Monday
night. I'm Robert MacNeil. Good night.
