content
Good evening. I'm Roger Mudd in New York. And I'm
Margaret Warner in Washington. After the News Summary, we update
the political turmoil in Moscow, preview President Clinton's health care
speech, look at one city's remedy, and have a Charlayne
Hunter-Gault conversation with journalist Michael O'Neill. At least 40 people
were killed this morning when an Amtrak passenger train, the
Sunset Limited, derailed on a bridge at Saraland, Alabama, just
north of Mobile. All three engines and four of the
eight cars left the rail just after 3 AM local
time. Two of the passenger cars plunged into the bayou,
and one of them was totally submerged. Rescue efforts were
hampered by darkness, fall, murky water, and some said alligators.
Officials said the Sunset Limited traveling from Los Angeles to
Miami carried 189 passengers and 17 crew members. Coast Guard
officials say 13 people are still unaccounted for. In Washington
this afternoon, an Amtrak spokesman held a news conference. There
really couldn't have been a worse combination of events. We
have a derailment, an emersion in water, fire. This is,
without doubt, the worst tragedy to -- that Amtrak has suffered
in its 23-year history. It is conceivable that today's catastrophic
accident could equal or eclipse the entire fatality rate for our
entire 23-year history. The cause of the accident is not
known. A freight train, reportedly, had earlier crossed the bridge
without incident. Officials from CSX Transportation, which owns the track,
and the National Transportation Safety Board will investigate. Margaret. Boris
Yeltsin appeared to have a clear edge today in his
struggle with hardline opponents. The streets of Moscow remained calm
as Yeltsin ventured out to greet supporters. He vowed not
to use force to overcome his opposition. Yeltsin dissolved the
conservative Russian parliament yesterday and ordered new parliamentary elections in
December. The parliament responded by swearing in a rival acting
president, Alexander Rutskoi, who addressed his supporters at the parliament
building today. Western leaders, meanwhile, rallied around Yeltsin, saying he
had no alternative but to break the deadlock between himself
and the Communist era parliament. President Clinton expressed his support
for Yeltsin again today. Mr. Clinton also said he was
hopeful the situation would remain calm. A second passenger jet
was shot down in the former Soviet republic of Georgia.
Up to 100 people were reportedly aboard the plane, which
was hit after landing at Sukhumi, the capital of a
breakaway region in Georgia. It was not clear how many
may have survived the attack. Twenty-eight people were killed yesterday
when another passenger jet was shot down into the Black
Sea near the same city. Georgian officials blamed both attacks
on rebels fighting for independence for their breakaway region. President
Clinton delivers his long-awaited, long-delayed healthcare reform speech tonight before
a joint session of the Congress. He and Vice President
Gore and Mrs. Clinton briefed congressional leaders from both parties
at the White House this morning. Reporters asked the President
why he thought his plan would succeed where past attempts
had failed. There is almost unanimous consensus that the cost
of continuing on the present course is greater than the
cost of change. With healthcare costs rising at more than
twice the rate of inflation and rising much faster than
that for small businesses, with many people--more people losing
their coverage every month so that we're paying more for
less healthcare, with the range of choices available to Americans
dropping dramatically and the administrative costs of the system escalating
at a breathtaking rate, that the cost of going on
is greater than the cost of change. I don't think
that there's ever been that much consensus before. Republican leaders
have pledged their cooperation, but after today's meeting, GOP Senators
and representatives spoke in differing tones about bipartisanship. I have
indicated to the President and Mrs. Clinton a number of
times we're going into this on our side, at least
as many people as I can convince, in a very
positive way. My view is that this is a good
beginning. It's going to be a long path before we
have final passage, and I really believe that in the
past in most healthcare areas we could have bipartisanship. The
President said in his inaugural address that the best way
to fix what's wrong with America is to use what's
right with America. He's applied just the opposite of that
principle in his response to healthcare. Any American citizen thinks
that they will be made better off in their healthcare
security by a government-mismanaged program of this magnitude I think
is going to be badly misguided. Again, I could not
be more disappointed. The President speaks to the Congress at
9 PM Eastern Time, and we'll have more on healthcare
later in the program. Also today, Mr. Clinton said the
federal government would pay for 90 percent of the cost
of the summer's Midwest floods, instead of the usual 75
percent. Flood damage in the nine states totaled $7.6 billion.
In a written statement, the President said the floods had
shown that natural disasters can affect the entire nation's economy.
Gen. John Shalikashvili, President Clinton's nominee to the Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told the Senate Armed Services
Committee today that he didn't learn of his father's World
War II Nazi affiliation until last month. After Mr. Clinton
named him to the post, reports surfaced that his father
had served in Nazi Germany's Vofen SS. It is most
troublesome to me that according to his own writings apparently
in the last months of the war, my father was
associated with some Georgian unit that was under the control
of the Vofen SS. I am deeply saddened that my
father had this tragic association. To me--and I believe
to all those who knew him--that is so absolutely
out of character. To me, he was a kind and
gentle man, and I loved him very much. He was
a man who perhaps loved his native Georgia too much,
certainly a man caught up in the awful tragedy of
World War II. Senators said the general's family wouldn't derail
his nomination. Meanwhile, Actress Jane Alexander began her confirmation hearings
today to be chairwoman of the National Endowment for the
Arts. Alexander told the committee she would follow the statutory
guidelines to ensure that grants are given to the highest
degree of artistic merit and excellence, but she said she
could not promise that the NEA would be free from
controversy. Jon Demjanjuk, the man cleared by Israel of being
Nazi Death Camp Guard "Ivan the Terrible," returned to Ohio
today and went into seclusion. The 73-year-old former auto worker
stopped in New York early this morning, where he was transferred
from an Israeli airliner to a plane chartered by his
family. Demjanjuk spent more than seven years in an Israeli
jail. The country's Supreme Court threw out his conviction in
July and then rejected requests for a new trial this
week. U.S. Attorney General Janet Reno has said she will
move to deport him. The shuttle Discovery landed safely today
in the pre-dawn darkness at Florida's Kennedy Space Center. It
was the first ever nighttime landing at a space facility.
NASA officials said the 10-day mission was nearly flawless. The
five astronauts tested tools and techniques that a second crew
will use to try to fix the Hubble Space Telescope
in December. That ends our News Summary. Ahead on the
NewsHour, the standoff in Moscow, the Clinton healthcare speech, one
city's healthcare solution, and a Charlayne Hunter-Gault conversation. We go
first tonight to an update on the political crisis and
standoff in Russia. Russia now has two men claiming to
be president, and depending on which president you ask, has
either one parliament or no parliament at all. But Boris
Yeltsin seems to have held onto some key levers of
support. Our update comes from Correspondent Ian Williams of Independent
Television News. They surrounded the White House today, hardline demonstrators
behind their hastily erected barricades voicing their anger at President
Yeltsin and their support for the deputies inside. But this
was not the mass expression of popular outrage the Russian
parliament had called for. No more than a few hundred
turned up, greeting with cheers parliament's new threats against Yeltsin
and his government. The police kept their distance, the building
guarded by a group of men in plain clothes. They
were uneasy and suspicious, frog marching a Russian cameraman away
after he appeared not to cooperate with them. Inside, more
of these irregular guards, Kalashnikov rifles slung over their shoulders,
clearly not convinced by Yeltsin's assurance today that he will
not use force to solve the crisis. Three floors above,
the two men seeking to rest power away from Yeltsin.
Parliamentary Speaker Ruslan Khasbulatov and the man appointed by parliament
as acting president, Alexander Rutskoi. We asked Mr. Khasbulatov what
he thought of the president's latest actions. The president, you
mean Rutskoi, well, I'm sure this president will do everything
in his power to normalize the situation. And how confident
was he that his president would win the power struggle?
The Russian people are already supporting us. This disgrace can't
possibly go on for a long time. There has to
be an end to it one way or another. And
Afghan war veteran, Mr. Rutskoi, likened the struggle for power
not to a battle but to a chess match. I'm
a pragmatic person. I'm always calculating. And if were to
call this a chess match and look two or three
steps ahead, we'd see that Yeltsin is in danger of
a checkmate, one or two moves and checkmate. One move
today for control of the media. Parliament, its long-distance telephones
cut by the president, demanded Rutskoi sack the pro-Yeltsin head
of state-controlled television and appoint his own man. News bulletins
have carried heavy coverage of the president's decree. They have
certainly been sympathetic to him though have also carried statements
from his opponents. The main television station is under heavy
police protection and remains in Yeltsin's hands. The media is
in the hands of the President's clique, if I may
call it such. The armed forces have been used to
put radio and TV under heavy guard. So what sort
of democracy is this? Most Russian newspapers, which now represent
a diverse range of opinions, have yet to comment in
detail on Yeltsin's decree, as last night's broadcasts came too
late for them. Another target of both sides, the defense
ministry. Last night, Rutskoi appointed his own defense and interior
ministers, but they have yet to get near their respective
ministries. Today, Yeltsin's defense minister, Havel Grachov, was meeting his
generals, a routine affair, he said. He also says the
armed forces would not become involved in any political actions,
though they fully support Boris Yeltsin, a statement of loyalty
echoed by Russia's interior minister. There was extra security around
public buildings today, but no sign of any troop deployment.
Parliament also ordered the country's central bank to stop funding
the presidential apparatus. Its leadership is conservative, but there is
no sign of them complying. And throughout Russian industry, where
discontent about reforms has been growing, workers were reluctant to
heed Khasbulatov's call to strike against Yeltsin. This afternoon, the
president appeared in public for the first time since his
announcement on a walkabout in Pushkin Square in the heart
of Moscow. He was, as always, brimming with confidence. "There
will be no negotiations with parliament because parliament doesn't exist
anymore," he declared. Buoyed by the news that so far
at least the armed forces have pledged their allegiance to
him, he told the people around him, "There will be
no blood on the streets," while Russia's other president appeared
on the balcony of the White House this evening to
address a gathering of his supporters, which by now have
swollen to several thousand. Here at the White House tonight
and among Yeltsin's supporters, there is a growing realization that
the outcome of this bitter struggle may not lie here
in Moscow but in the regions. Both sides have been
courting local leaders, and both are fearful that independence-minded republics
and regions may not take sides at all. Instead, they
may ignore central authority completely. Next tonight, the Clinton healthcare
plan. Later this evening, the President will formally present his
national healthcare plan to a joint session of Congress. The
long-heralded plan is at the heart of the President's domestic
policy. At stake is the reorganization of a $1 trillion
industry that accounts for one-seventh of the national economy. We
begin now with a Kwame Holman backgrounder. If any doubted
that health care would be a hot political issue in
the '90s, Harris Wofford probably made believers out of them.
Wofford! Wofford! During his 1991 campaign for a Pennsylvania Senate
seat, Wofford hammered away at the issue. He said people
who lose their jobs shouldn't lose their medical coverage as
well. Apparently, the voters agreed and swept Wofford to an
upset victory over Attorney General and former Pennsylvania Governor Richard
Thornburgh. We want national health insurance, and we want it
now! It was Wofford's political strategist, James Carville, who recognized
the importance of healthcare to the campaign, and when Carville
moved on to Bill Clinton's presidential campaign, so did the
healthcare issue. A healthcare program that will provide affordable healthcare
to all Americans but not by beginning with a huge
tax increase. By asking the wealthy to pay their fair
share, and controlling healthcare costs where the waste is most
flagrant among insurance companies and drug companies and bureaucracies. We
can keep what is best about our system, the right
to choose your doctor, your hospital, your provider. We can
keep the whole thing private, including insurance. And we must
require people not to be denied access to health coverage
because of preexisting conditions. Candidate Clinton vowed to make healthcare
reform the No. 1 priority of his administration. And shortly
after he was sworn in to office, President Clinton underscored
his campaign pledge by appointing First Lady Hillary to head
the White House task force on healthcare reform. I think
that in the coming months the American people will learn,
as the people of our state did, that we have
a First Lady of many talents but who, most of
all, can bring people together around complex and difficult issues
to hammer out consensus and get things done. In the
weeks and months that followed, Hillary Rodham Clinton held a
number of high-profile town meetings and healthcare forums. She invited
healthcare professionals, as well as everyday Americans, to give their
opinions and advice on what needed to be contained in
any healthcare reform package. Many of the problems that were
pointed out that we could all agree on, that we
don't have enough primary care practitioners to do the kind
of work that we heard about from the doctor in
the audience and the doctor in the panel. Well, how
do we get quickly to reverse the ratio of 70
percent specialists to 30 percent generalists? I don't know that
it is possible to satisfy every need that was heard
today. I think the best we can do is to
be honest about facing the problems that every one of
us in this room have had a hand in helping
to create. Mr. Speaker, the President of the United States.
Tonight, will be President Clinton's second address to a joint
session of Congress. He's expected to lay out the principles
of healthcare reform he wants met, including health security for
all, simplifying the healthcare system, making sure everybody pays a
fair share, and achieving savings through cost containment, while maintaining
choice and the quality of care. And what the President
does not want is the kind of partisan battle that
ensued after his first speech to Congress on the budget.
Mrs. Clinton has kept closely in touch with members of
Congress from both parties, and it appears a bipartisan spirit
is there. I really feel that on this issue, one
that has all kinds of interest among the American people
out there, that we can definitely work together, and there
are a number of options for us to consider. One
of those options was offered by Senate Minority Leader Bob
Dole. Fundamentally, we believe that if you give business men
and women and individuals the tools they need to gain
access to reasonably priced healthcare coverage, they will take that
opportunity, absent massive government intervention or mandates. As the President
prepared this afternoon to deliver tonight's address, it was with
the knowledge that no matter what specifics he presents, the
details of healthcare reform will be worked out by Congress.
Now, two officials who've dealt with health issues in previous
administrations. Dr. Bernadine Healy was director of the National Institutes
of Health under President Bush. She's currently seeking the Republican
nomination for the U.S. Senate for Ohio. Joseph Califano was
Secretary of Health, Education, & Welfare under President Carter. He
also served as chief domestic adviser to President Johnson. Welcome
to both of you. Let me start with you, Mr.
Califano. What does the President have to do tonight? What's
the most important case he has to make? Well, I
think the case is made for healthcare reform. What he's
got to do is really give a speech that keeps
this subject on the front burner. I think the President's
role is to arouse the people to a call to
arms. The bill is going to be written in Congress.
The details of this bill will be written in Congress.
And I think he's done it brilliantly so far. And
I think he's played on the greatest concern of the
American people. Most American people have healthcare, but they're all
worried about losing it when they lose their jobs. With
thousands of layoffs in the past couple of years, with
business, big business angry that other big business isn't covering
their employees, he's played on all of that very well.
And I think the people are ready for reform. Do
you agree, Dr. Healy? I think the most important thing
he should do tonight is to make sense and not
to incite fear. I think fear has been a driving
force in this debate, and I don't think it's a
healthy one. I think facts, not fear, should dominate, and
facts have to be surrounded--surrounding the issues, affordability, coverage
of those 37 million who are not covered, and some
recognition of the fact that over 200 million Americans are
getting good care and don't necessarily have to have their
whole care disassembled in order to help the 37 million
who do need coverage. Well, Mr. Califano, where do you
think the President starts at with the public? That is,
the polls seem quite contradictory. 90 percent of the people
say they like their own healthcare, but 90 percent of
the people tell the New York Times they want the
system drastically overhauled. Well, I think most of the people
love healthcare, and they love not paying for it. And
they feel like they're not paying for it. I think,
where does he start? He starts where Richard Nixon arrived,
where Jimmy Carter and I arrived. When I started looking
at healthcare on a search of HEW, I was all--
I started with the viewpoint of a national plan, with
the federal government running it. But the reality is that
every nation in the world that covers all their people,
we're the only industrialized nation besides South Africa that doesn't,
every nation did it out of their existing healthcare system.
So he starts with the employer mandate. Like it or
not, the reality is that most Americans get their healthcare
from their employment relationship. And there, I think, we ought
to treat it like the minimum wage. Minimum healthcare benefits
like a minimum wage, like disability insurance, like unemployment insurance.
These are things that employers have paid for in this
country, and the arguments you hear about not having a
mandate really resonate with the arguments that people made in
the 1930s against the 25 cent minimum wage when that
was proposed. And I think that'll happen. It will be
phased in over several years, but I think that piece
will be done. Dr. Healy, do you agree that the
employer mandate--by that we mean most coverage will come
through the employers--was politically in any event the only
way he could go? No, I don't think so. I
think that what you really have to do is look
at the people who are uninsured, tease them out, and
find out how we can design tailored programs for people.
60 percent of them are young people who simply don't
want to be burdened with a price tag of two
thousand, four thousand dollars, when they're never going to consume
that much cost in a year. So I think there
are ways that we could have individual mandates that give
the individual patient more responsibility and more control over a
large amount of money that's going to be spent per
capita. There's a very deep feeling of paternalism among this
plan that says people can't handle their healthcare for themselves,
we're going to seize and control it, tell them what
they can do, what they can't do. It's a "one
size fits all" approach. And I think Joe knows that
back 20 years ago we were all toying with national
health insurance, but a lot of social experimentation has gone
on around the world which has shown that national health
insurance leads to long waiting lines. It does not lead
to efficiencies, and worst of all, it is a failure,
judged by the fact that most of those countries are
starting to privatize. Let me go back just though to
the politics of the situation right now. What kind of
a job do you think President and Mrs. Clinton have
done so far in trying to get different constituency groups
behind this? To date, I think they've done a remarkable
job. I will tell you, and I have said it
publicly, six months ago, I thought there was no prayer
of having a major reform by the end of 1994.
I think now the chances are better than 50/50. I'd
make one point, the emphasis on the employment relationship is
important because of when you look at those thirty-seven to
forty million people, two-thirds of them work, or are dependents
of workers. And if you're Chrysler, or you're in the
steel industry, or you're IBM, or you're Kodak, your blood
is boiling if you're running those companies when you look
at retailers and fast food companies and hotel chains, big
multimillion dollar corporations that don't cover their employees. So that
piece, the quickest way to knock off a big piece
of that is to mandate. But I think in the
basic question, they've done it very well, gone around the
country. They have cobbled together a remarkable array of ideas.
And I think when you look at the 229-page plan,
it's really more of a big barrel of ideas than
it is a plan that dots every "i" and crosses
every "t." And there, I mean, I give them A+
for this, I mean, much better than I ever thought
they could do. And I think Mrs. Clinton has been
remarkable because she's learned so much. I met with her,
for example, on, on covering substance abuse and the importance
of covering substance abuse, which Dr. Healy, I think, shares.
In one way or another we've got to deal with
that problem. She was remarkable. She asked all the tough
questions. She asked us to put together the best people
in the country to put treatment programs together. We did.
We gave them a package. I don't think they've adopted
every bit of it, but they've taken, they've recognized you've
got to cut, you can't have healthcare reform in this
country without doing something about substance abuse. I think they've
done a good job so far. Dr. Healy, do you
think that she has brought the Republicans along? Where--how
do you think the Republicans on the Hill are going
to play this? First, I think that there is no
question that both of the Clintons have done a magnificent
job in making healthcare finally a front burner issue. I
think every American has focused on this issue, and I
do believe it has to be a nonpartisan issue. But
that does not mean that there isn't a very strong
threat of political philosophy that is inherent in the approach
to healthcare solutions. And I think that the Democrats traditionally
think the solution is bigger and bigger government and more
and more taxes, and I think the Republican political philosophy
is smaller government and more empowerment of individual people. Let
taxpayers manage their own money. But, I mean, as a
practical matter, how do you think Republicans are going to
play it here? They don't have the votes to pass
their own plan. What do you think is going to
be important to them, to Republicans, in making changes to
the plan, which Mrs. Clinton has indicated an openness to
do? Well, I think the most important thing is to
work in a constructive way focusing on the people who
are uninsured and not trying a massive social experiment with
over 250 million Americans, 80 percent of whom are adequately
covered. I think that the strategy of the Republicans is
going to have to be to focus on the job
that needs to be done and not to buy into
a massive restructuring of the entire healthcare system in this
country which has economic consequences, as well as human consequences.
Please. Can I just--the issue I don't think is
a Democratic/Republican issue. I think Republicans and Democrats will split
all over the lot. I think the politics of this
issue is one trillion dollars, and it's on the side
of the people that are paying. The federal government's paying.
The states are paying. The cities are paying. Business is
paying, and individuals are paying. They're going to fight over
not paying any more or paying less. On the side
of the people that are getting the trillion dollars, the
health insurance companies, the HMOs, the doctors, the hospitals, the
medical equipment manufacturers, the pharmaceutical companies, the hospital unions, the
nurses, they're going to fight over hanging on to their
piece of the pie. And I don't think this problem
will break in Congress between Republicans and Democrats. I think
it's going to break among those interest groups. And I've
often said I wish the President had been able to
get campaign finance reform through before the healthcare bill went
up because the buckets of money that will pour in
and already are pouring into Capitol Hill, this is the
way this issue will break politically. I think there still
is a core issue that's very polar, and that is,
is the solution going to be government telling you what
to do about your healthcare, or is it going to
be the individual making choices? And, remember, remember, it was
the President and the Vice President who were all over
this country just a few weeks ago telling us that
the government needed to be reinvented. There's a mammoth intellectual
inconsistency in seeing that government inefficiencies with $50 to fill
out one form, which is why government needs to be
reinvented, that same bureaucracy is going to seize 15 percent
of our economy and take over the healthcare of 250
million Americans. That's the core issue. I would urge everybody
to go back and read Richard Nixon's message to Congress
in 1971 and his message to Congress in 1972. What
did he say? He said we need an employer mandate,
and he said, we need more HMOs so we get
people into more efficient healthcare systems. But that's the core
of what Bill Clinton is saying. That's exactly what Jimmy
Carter said. After we looked for about two and a
half years at every alternative, we ended up in the
same place. Okay. That raises a question. All these other
countries, all these industrialized countries have healthcare. Explain why, one,
we don't have any national healthcare, but two, why it's
going to be so much more difficult here than it
was in Europe to get this? We don't have it
I think in part because of something Dr. Healy said,
which is most Americans have healthcare, and there is, there
is a safety net out there. We forget, people that
really get sick or really get hurt get healthcare, they
get it in the most inefficient way, in emergency rooms
of Cleveland Clinic, and elsewhere, and what have you, so
it's there. And the second thing is, in this country
now, I mean, healthcare is almost America's biggest business. It
is the only industry in the country where hundreds of
thousands of jobs were created during the 1990/91 recession, and
there this is as high stakes as political poker gets
in the Congress of the United States. Whereas, of course,
when it was instituted in European Countries, healthcare might be
2 or 3 percent of the GDP. It wasn't a
huge--just take Britain, for example. First of all, it's
a very small percentage but also all they did, people
say, oh, it's socialism. But Britons aren't socialists. What happened
was the voluntary hospital system in Great Britain had broken
down during World War II, and the government was running
every hospital. Every doctor and nurse was in the military,
on the government payroll. They just legislated the existing situation
in 1945. That's what they have done. Incidentally, I will
share one thing. I think Bernadine makes one important point.
The cost part of this equation, the rising healthcare part
of this equation exists in every country in the world.
It's different here because doctors are paid more here, but
we also have a lot of problems. When you look
at Canada, we have AIDS in a way and substance
abuse and violence in a way that other countries don't
have it. Sadly, we're almost out of time for such
a complicated issue. Let me end with one question. And
I'll start with you. Right now, we spend 14 percent
of our GDP on healthcare. The Clintons hope to hold
to 17 percent by the year 2000. Can a modern
society be economically healthy spending just that much on healthcare
for its citizens? Does it make sense? Well, I think
it is expensive, it's good value, but it cannot continue
to rise at the rate it's been rising. Everyone agrees.
That's where I think there is consensus across the board,
and I think some of the positive aspects of the
Hilton--of the Clinton health plan is that it does
talk about administrative inefficiencies, it talks about a universal health
insurance form, which will be a blessing for everyone, would
probably save billions of dollars. It talks about tort reform.
It also talks about tax deductibility for premiums of people
who are self-insured. So there are a lot of elements
in there that will help to drive down the cost
of care, but we have to be careful that when
we speak about making healthcare cost efficient that we take
out the fat and don't cut into the bones and
the muscles because America is not ready to say no
to transplantation, to kidney dialysis, as many countries around the
world do. America's not ready to say, we're not going
to save that baby who's only a thousand grams. Other
countries do. Mr. Califano. I think--I mean, I think
we can hold the rate, the proportion of GNP, but
let's not be unrealistic. Healthcare costs are going to rise.
What we're talking about is the rate of increase. You're
not going to bring 40 million people--you know, it's
not going to be good for my father, my mother,
my wife, or my child--into this system and keep
the cost the same. And I think we have recognize
and be realistic about that. I think we can hold
them. I think that in terms of, of the big
ticket items, cultural changes, like the way people think about
dying, whether they want to be tied up to tubes
or be at home, will have a greater impact than
any of the law or regulation those people are writing.
Well, thank you both very much. And we'll welcome you
back to watch the speech together. Thanks, Roger. Over to
you, Roger. Next, we look at one health reform model
that is already up and running. The city of Rochester,
New York, has a unique healthcare system that President Clinton
has praised as worth learning from. Medical Correspondent Fred De
Sam Lazaro has this report on the Rochester system. It
first aired on the NewsHour in February. For 21-year-old Jason
Bowman, it's been an arduous journey back to a normal
routine two years after it was interrupted by a severe
car accident. And I fractured my C-6/C-7 vertebrae, which left
me paralyzed. And that was the only thing that happened
actually was a broken neck, and I didn't suffer any
broken bones or legs. It was a whiplash kind of
an injury? Yes. Hearing the word "quadriplegic," when you know
what it means is pretty devastating, and so you know
that you're in for--you're going to be locked into
the healthcare system for quite a while. Given that grim
diagnosis, Jim and Barbara Bowman say their son has made
a remarkable recovery, which they attribute to a ferocious spirit
and superb but expensive medical care. Jason's medical bills have
neared a quarter of a million dollars. Almost all of
it was covered under his parents' insurance policy. The Bowmans
run a veterinary hospital with eight employees. In most of
the U.S. Jason's bills would have jacked up the premiums
on their group health insurance. That's not the case here
in Rochester, New York. We pay the same premiums that
anyone else pays. We've had rate increases, but they're across-the-board
and according to whatever the overall increase in healthcare is
for the area. He hasn't been singled out in any
way, as we can see, because of what he's cost
the system or because of his injury or because he
will be an ongoing burden to the system. Here in
Rochester those premiums are about a third less than anywhere
else in the U.S. As a result, only 6 percent
of Rochester's citizens do not carry insurance, far fewer than
the 14 percent on average nationally who are uninsured. Four
factors account for Rochester's relatively high access and affordability: One
insurer, Blue Cross Blue Shield, has a virtual monopoly in
the city; there is little overlap in the services healthcare
facilities provide; the insurer and healthcare providers set fees after
tough bargaining; and no one is denied insurance coverage, not
even the sick. Their insurance premiums are determined by a
mechanism known as community rating. In other words, the risk
of covering a Jason Bowman is spread over the entire
community of 230,000, not just the veterinary clinic group. It's
a system that like everything else in Rochester, it seems,
has its origins in the giant Eastman Kodak Corporation. Kodak
employs 40,000 people in Rochester. It's been a huge business
here and a philanthropic, even paternalistic presence since its founding
in the late 1800s by George Eastman. Early on as
healthcare began to become more and more expensive, he began
to look for ways of helping Kodak people prepare for
that, and that led to work in this community to
institute one of the very early insurance arrangements around hospital
care. Early medical insurance policies were priced according to community-wide
risk, but starting in the '30s as the health insurance
industry grew, the market became fragmented. Insurers offered big employers
discounts in exchange for their volume business, forming groups separate
from the community. What's left in the risk pool are
self-employed individuals or small businesses, like car dealerships. With indeterminate
risks, they are forced to pay higher premiums. They're also
subject to exclusion based on medical history, an insurance tactic
known as "cherry picking." In Rochester, however, spokesman David Edwards
says Kodak asked its insurer to stick with the community
rating system. We are, in effect, pooling with the large
numbers of small businesses and individuals. In fact, in this
community an individual can walk in off the street and,
in effect, pay the same price that Kodak pays for
healthcare. And it's more expensive to do that, so what
we wind up doing, in effect, is subsidizing to some
extent the administration and management of the care for those
groups. One reason Rochester is able to have a community
rating system is the city virtually has one insurance company,
Blue Cross Blue Shield of Rochester. You do have a
copy of the claim that you submitted? Kodak has long
given its insurance business exclusively to the Blues. Other employers
have followed suit, essentially sharing in Kodak's volume discount, giving
Blue Cross Blue Shield a near monopoly in Rochester and
keeping out the so-called "cherry picker" competitors. Howard Berman is
Blue Cross Blue Shield's chief executive officer. Large employers play
a--historically have played a remarkably important role, and particularly
the Eastman Kodak Company. We, however, at Blue Cross Blue
Shield have over 6,000 accounts, 6,000 businesses that buy health
insurance through us. Those businesses and Blue Cross Blue Shield
form a powerful coalition with a long history of negotiating
with doctors and hospitals to establish fees and keep costs
down. The results are readily evident. There's been no addition
to Rochester's hospital capacity since the 1960s in sharp contrast
to national trends. Today while hospitals nationwide are closing or
merging, Rochester's eight facilities are typically ninety, sometimes one hundred
percent occupied. Because they're all nearly full, hospitals cooperate more
than compete with each other. There is little duplication of
services. Radiologist Derace Schaffer says the big emphasis on cost
control means innovation and new technology come to Rochester much
later than other cities. There are other drawbacks, Dr. Schaffer
adds. We periodically close our emergency rooms to new patients
or we find ourselves at times having to discharge patients
somewhat earlier than we'd like to send them home just
because there aren't enough beds, not enough rooms in the
inn. And the same thing applies to our intensive care
units and coronary care unit beds in the community, where
we sometimes are shuffling patients around. While he praises the
community rating system for increasing access to healthcare, Schaffer is
critical of an approach he feels penalizes doctors. You cannot
place too much emphasis on the fact that the Rochester
system works because of the fact the physicians have accepted
a much lower reimbursement system here than elsewhere. Doctors are
also subjected to oversight from the insurance company. They must
often clear or justify medical or surgical decisions. Everyone else
in that system is concerned, primary concern is cost. The
physicians' primary concern is quality of care. The physicians find
themselves often placing themselves between the patients and the healthcare
system in order to protect the patients from the system.
However, patients of the Rochester healthcare system don't seem to
share that concern. A recent poll showed the vast majority
are satisfied. Dr. Robert Blendon of Harvard School of Public
Health who conducted the survey says overall, Rochester has a
balanced approach. I just don't see any evidence that Rochester
is a model of a declining culture of medical practice.
I think physicians who are paid less are angry, and
I can understand their frustration, but that's one of the
reasons why the average person in Rochester can afford their
health insurance. So if we have to trade off somewhat
less well paid physicians for people who can afford healthcare,
I always come down for healthcare. Along with doctors, Blendon
says patients will have to come to terms with limits
to their autonomy. It's a dilemma the Bowmans faced when
they attempted to move Jason to a rehabilitation facility in
Denver. The local hospital refused to make the referral needed
under their managed care policy. That was a plain old
statement that "this was as good as any other spinal
rehab facility in the world." And that's a quote. It's
not as good as any other. After producing research showing
Rochester lacked the specialized facility her son needed, Barbara Bowman
says the insurer relented. We can do that. Other people
that were maybe not quite as knowledgeable or a little
bit more meek than we were may have not been
effective in doing that. I don't know. Well, we're going
to face a choice. If you want an insurance plan
that allows you to go, for example, to every cancer
center in America that you choose, that plan will be
more expensive than one that says we've negotiated a special
rate at a center in our community. And I think
we're going to have to decide as a country if
we want to allow people to make those choices. The
Rochester plan was closely studied by members of the Clinton
task force, and parts of it will be reflected in
the plan Mr. Clinton presents to the Congress later tonight.
Finally tonight, one of our weekly Charlayne Hunter-Gault conversations. As
events unfolded in Moscow yesterday and today, the world was
scrambling to react to the situation. The breathtaking pace of
current events and how they frequently catch us unaware is
the theme of a new book The Roar of the
Crowd, How Television and People Power are Changing the World.
It's by former New York Daily News editor Mike O'Neill,
who recently sat down with Charlayne. Michael O'Neill, thank you
for joining us. Great to be here, Charlayne. You believe
that we're in the midst of a revolution not only
in America but in the entire world. Tell me a
little bit about that revolution. Well, I think that in
order to understand a lot of the dynamics of what's
now going on all over the world in terms of
ethnic strife and turmoil here and turmoil there, we have
to understand I think that one of the real catalysts
of all this is what I would call the mass
communications revolution, i.e., the enormous spread of television, computers, satellites,
et cetera, which is drawing the entire world together, much
more closely together than ever before in history. And it's--
it's a very profound kind of a revolution, just take
one aspect of it all. You now have most of--
certainly a large majority of the people of the world
seeing the world, seeing the world around them through television
for the first time in history, peasants who have never
even--don't even know how to read are able to
tune into the world. The monopoly of literacy, which has
existed really since the beginning of human history, that monopoly
has now been broken. What does it mean? After years
of exclusion really, ordinary people now are able to demand
their place in the sun. They're able to say that
they want the kind of life, the good life that
they see on the screen. That's what you, what's you
call "people power?" People power right, people that, for example,
in remote areas of China are now aware of the
enormous increase in economic wellbeing and the good life, for
example, being led by many of their fellow Chinese say
in Eastern provinces, in Fujian and Guan Dong. And they
then register their feelings locally, and those are felt and
even though they are not out necessarily demonstrating today or
tomorrow or the next day, although there is, as we
see all over the world, a great deal of activism.
We see people migrating as a result of what they
see on television. We see people demonstrating. The students in
Tiananmen Square had seen demonstrations in South Korea that influenced
their desire to demonstrate in Tiananmen Square, an amazing thing.
One of the things you write in your book is
that society shaped by the mass media are coming to
dominate the world. Tell me a little about that. Well,
let's take, for example, this fad that we now have
going around the world. We have the idea in the
United States that somehow or other democracy has triumphed as
a result of the collapse of Communism. And it's true
that Communism has collapsed, but we don't--I don't think
we know whether democracy is going to triumph. One of
the aspects of, and one of the most popular aspects
of the so-called western, liberal western approach to government, et
cetera, is a, a consumerism, i.e., a mass marketing of
goods, a mass marketing of services, et cetera, and that
is now being spread around the world as part of
the democratic "western model" of the way a global, an
interdependent global economy is now going to operate. What does
that do? In China now, you have TV commercials which
people are being urged to buy this, that or other
individual item, consumer goods, toothpaste, what have you. Well, that
is the phenomenal--that's a real phenomenon because it is
a direct approach to an individual consumer in China and
asking that consumer to make a decision on the basis
of what he or she saw on television, that is
pushing the idea of individualism that is quite antithetical to
the kind of family-oriented, ancestor, ancestor-oriented, or group-oriented kind of
society that has existed for centuries in China. Now nothing's
going to happen today or tomorrow, but what this whole
force is doing, all this mass communication of the mass
marketing idea, is doing, it's breaking down these kinds of
social patterns, and at the same time it's, it's--it
tends to promote individualism versus collectivism, which is the hallmark
of the totalitarian systems. And it promotes pluralism as against
mass, the kind of mass governance that we saw in
the case of Nazism. But you also say that while
people power is becoming nearly universal, it is, because of
the nature of the medium, the potential for having power
without knowledge is great. Right. Now explain that. Well, I
guess what I'm talking about there is the fact that
if you have a governing, a system of government in
which the decisions are being driven by instant emotional reactions
to an event, for example, why did the United States
become involved in Somalia? It became involved because of the
emotional reaction of the American people. Why did President Mitterrand
fly to Sarajevo? Because he was under pressure to do
something. Of course, he ultimately never, never, ultimately didn't do
very much. But that's a good thing, isn't it? Yeah.
The part of it that's good, of course, is that
it does force the governing, ruling elite, if you will,
to be conscious of and to respond and be sensitive
to public opinion. On the other hand, if that public
opinion demands immediate action in any given instance, it eliminates
the kind of deliberative process, the period of time when
you would take normally to study a problem and deliberate
the pros and cons, consider all the options, and ultimately
make a decision based on a very reasoned kind of
discourse, and deliberative process. That's quite different from immediately reacting
to some emotional explosion. The other part of all this
is it tends to, to focus the leadership of the
government, say the White House, on a daily rush of
crises--the floods out in the Middle West one day,
the riots in South Central Los Angeles another day. And
longer range and deeper problems that have no telegenicity, that
have no--cannot be easily translated into images--those tend
to fall into the back burner, don't get any attention
at all. And yet, in the long run, they may
be much more, much more important to deal with. You
also believe that journalists are complicit in this, right? Well,
yeah, right. You mean, me? Co-conspirators, present company excepted of
course. Of course. One of the things you say is
that journalists arrive late at the front lines of history.
Right, right. What's the answer to this? I mean, because
you write about a society dominated by mass media that
is a--appealing to the lowest common denominator of culture.
You talked about the consumerism now, the lowest common denominator
of politics. What's the answer? Well--Is the genie out
of the bottle? I think it is. I think technology
is really driving society. It is actually driving change, and
the velocity, and the volume of change are simply enormous,
and it's driving change faster than institutions, including journalism, are
able to, to adapt to that change. And I--the
great fear I have, instead of all this euphoria about
the collapse of Communism and the heyday of a new
world order, as George Bush put it, is that, that
we may have the--we may--the stresses of social
and political stresses may be building up so rapidly, so
much faster than the institutions are adapting to, to cope
with 'em, you can have the same kind of social
breakdown that you had after World War I, which would
be an absolute catastrophe. Do I have the solution to
this? If there is any kind of solution at all,
I think we have to put an emphasis on prevention
instead of reaction. Journalism now is designed to react. It's
designed to report what has already happened. But it's always
been the case. Yes, exactly. So what's different, and what's
new? And why would someone watching this not say, well,
these are the musings of a print man who's probably
always had an electronic media bias? Right. Exactly. Well, No.
1, I think that the print media have the same
responsibility to try to move ahead of the curb, to
get ahead of the curb, rather than falling in behind
the curb. Now, as I say in the book, I
don't know whether this could be achieved or not. I'm
just saying that an ideal world would be one in
which journalism, politics, and diplomacy would try to catch social
change at a much earlier stage. If we don't do
that, all sorts of tremendous problems are coming down, coming
down the pike at us, and the psychology that is
integral to what, the kind of mass consumerism that we're
talking about, the so-called mass market economy that we're pushing
around the world, that psychology is to think about today
and not tomorrow. And I worry. That's a very serious
concern of mine. Well, Michael O'Neill, I hate to end
on that note, but we will. Thank you for joining
us. Thank you. Again, the main stories of this Wednesday,
at least 40 people were killed when an Amtrak passenger
train derailed and plunged into a bayou near Mobile, Alabama.
Officials said 13 people are still missing. Boris Yeltsin appeared
to gain the upper hand in this political battle with
hardliners for control of Russia, and President Clinton prepared to
unveil details of his long-awaited healthcare reform plan in his
speech to the Congress. Good night, Margaret. Good night, Roger.
That's the NewsHour for tonight. We will have full coverage
of the President's healthcare speech to Congress later tonight on
most of these PBS stations, and we'll be back tomorrow
with an in-depth look at the Clinton plan. I'm Margaret
Warner. Thank you, and good night.
