content
Good evening. Anyone with the mildest interest in the Presidential
election might be forgiven for thinking that abortion was the
number one issue dividing Ford and Carter. For the past
week or ten days, abortion has often appeared to dominate
the news, with both candidates appearing before a panel of
Roman Catholic bishops, with the Ford camp talking about the
crucial Catholic vote, and with anti-abortion demonstrators dogging Carter's trail.
Yesterday the dispute spread to Congress, with an argument over
whether to cut off federal funding of abortions for poor
women. The National Organization for Women has claimed that the
candidates are being intimidated by the bishops and are ignoring
the views of what they call "a majority of American
women." And a national organization of priests expressed deep concern
that the bishops were stressing abortion to the neglect of
other issues. So, while the polls may show that abortion
is one of the least urgent concerns of most voters,
the issue has firmly planted itself in the campaign. Tonight:
Where does the abortion issue really belong in this election?
First, where the candidates actually stand. Here's what Mr. Ford
told a news conference after his meeting with the bishops
on Friday: The Democratic platform and the Republican platform on
the issue of abortion are quite different. I subscribe to
the Republican platform and Governor Carter subscribes to the Democratic
platform. His position and mine are not identical; my position
is that of the Republican platform, and I'll stick with
it. I have had the position for some time that
there should be a Constitutional amendment that would permit the
individual states to make the decision based on a vote
of the people of each of the states. The bishops
said they were encouraged, but not totally satisfied by the
President's stand. On the other hand, they had been disappointed
in Jimmy Carter's statement ten days before that while he
personally opposes abortion he does not support a Constitutional amendment
on the subject. Anti-abortion, or pro-life people have shown themselves
to be more than disappointed in Mr. Carter. He's been
on the receiving end of a number of their demonstrations
recently; one example, a gathering in Scranton, Pennsylvania last week:
Life! Life! Life! It's rather ironic that abortion should turn
out to be such a thorny issue for Jimmy Carter,
because according to most people he scored his first victory
in the Iowa caucuses way back in January because of
pro-life support. But afterward he was accused of having misled
the people about where he stood. Some thought that because
he said he backed a national statute on abortion Carter
supported a Constitutional amendment on the issue. Carter said he
didn't and he doesn't, even though he is personally against
abortion. The impact of the abortion question appeared to fade
after the early primaries; the only major candidate who made
a profit on the issue was Ronald Reagan, who won
the backing of many anti-abortion groups for his support of
a Constitutional amendment banning abortions. The issue came up again
during the party's nominating conventions and platform hearings. The Democrats
stated in their platform that while they recognized the religious
and ethical nature of the question, they believed it was
undesirable to attempt to amend the Constitution to overturn the
Supreme Court's decision on the matter. The stand drew fire
from within the party, denounced during a nominating speech for
Ellen McCormick, the Long Island housewife who had run for
President as a pro-life candidate: I have supported the human
and civil rights movement all of my adult life. I
am deeply concerned that in this age of technology we
are not concerned with the protection of those who cannot
protect themselves: the unborn child...At their convention, the Republicans
nominated Gerald Ford but gave him an abortion platform plank
that appeared to have been designed by Ronald Reagan. It
called for the continuance of the public dialogue on abortion
and supported the efforts of those seeking the enactment of
a Constitutional amendment to "restore life for unborn children." The
Reverend James Ratigan is President of the National Federation of
Priests` Councils. Father Ratigan, yesterday your organization, as I said
at the beginning of the program, expressed some concern over
the stress that the bishops were placing on abortion. Why
did you do that? Is abortion not a number one
issue to you? It is a number one issue to
us and our board. The context in which we wrote
the letter to Cardinal Cook was that members from his
committee came out to speak to our executive board-28
priests from across the country--and we met to try
talk to them: how could we join together to ensure
that an amendment would be passed? In the course of
that, though, we did mention in the letter that one
of the overriding concerns that many of the members expressed
at the board meeting was that it seemed to be
an impression that they were getting that the bishops were
stressing this one issue. And back in February in their
pamphlet on the political responsibility in an election year they
called for us to look at all the candidates on
a very broad base of issues, and look for those
issues which would present a more wide range. And we
felt the bishops were falling into the trap themselves of
judging candidates on a single issue. Do you agree with
those who think that this antiabortion activity could hurt the
Church, cause a backlash and alienate members? It could, but
I don't think that would be a reason for us
not to continue our own fight to change the Constitution.
But I think that in the context of doing so
we have to do so in a way that will
eliminate that possibility as much as possible--but we do
have to speak out. Yours is a grassroots organization, so
to speak; you have, I gather, 117 councils in approximately
45 states--how do you assess the reaction to the
bishops` efforts at that level, at the grassroots level, in
the Church? Well, as the Board reported at the meeting,
there seems to be a certain hesitancy on the part
of many priests to get into the issue right now.
And I think that's partly because they sense that many
of the forces who are right now pushing for a
Constitutional amendment are not the people who are a broad-based,
pro-life group; and that they find a lot of difficulty
with that. Is that because the rank and file in
the Catholic Church is less inclined than it might have
been in the past to take guidance on such issues
from the hierarchy in the Church? I think they are
less inclined. I think that's one of the problems with
the program as it's presently presented.--that we'd like to
see a stronger emphasis on even speaking to our own
people, in an educational manner, or a way of trying
to bring their consciences into what we believe should be
a correct stance before we go before a general public
and call for a Constitutional amendment. Thank you. Jim? Robin,
Monsignor James McHugh is Director of the Pastoral Plan for
Pro-Life Activities for the Bishops` Conference and as such is
one of the key leaders in the anti-abortion movement. Monsignor,
you've heard what Father Ratigan has had to say; do
you agree with his criticism of the bishops` stand, that
they may have lost sight of their own instructions for
a broad-based approach in this election? No, I don't agree
with Father Ratigan. The bishops have consistently said that their
concern about abortion, though fundamental, is the broad basis on
which they then voice their concerns about those other problems
in our society, or dangers in our society, which would
in some way or other endanger other rights--the right
to eat, the right to jobs, the right to housing.
In other words, the bishops see the abortion issue in
a broad context of human rights which the Church should
speak out in favor of. Why has the Church not
been heard on the other issues and only on abortion?
Because the abortion issue has been interjected into this Presidential
campaign, and as a result has received unprecedented visibility. The
bishops didn't give it that, of course-the press gave
it that, the media gave it that--and I think
that the reason that it has achieved that kind of
visibility is that it is something that people understand readily.
It's harder for people to understand how the two candidates
for the Presidency are going to fine-tune the economy; but
the abortion issue is close to them. Let's pursue that
a minute, Monsignor. Has a group of bishops called on
President Ford and Jimmy Carter and asked them what they're
going to do about the poor people, what they're going
to do about inflation, what they're going to do about
foreign aid? It was abortion that the bishops went to
see the two candidates about, was it not? No, not
quite. The discussion with President Ford ranged over five or
six different issues; the abortion issue got primary concern, but
the other issues were treated equally and fairly. They did
speak about employment, they did speak about human rights in
various countries throughout the world and the relevance of our
foreign policy to the protection of human rights. So we
did get a chance to kind of spread the base
a little bit there; however, with Governor Carter the discussion
stayed pretty much on the abortion issue because that was
what the Governor wanted to speak about, it was something
that he wanted to try to understand the bishops better
on, and it was something that they wanted to try
to be fair and understanding to him about. Have you
picked up any of the hesitancy that Father Ratigan talked
about on the part of the parish priest to really
get out front on this issue? No, I don't think
we've picked up that kind of hesitancy. Now, remember, we're
talking about 50,000 priests around the country and it's pretty
difficult to tell where they all are at any time
in any one issue; but from our perspective we have
programs that are directed towards the priests, and we find
them highly cooperative on a wide range of programs. Naturally,
some are going to prioritize--some will be more concerned...
Going to do what, sir? Some will prioritize. Those working
in the inner city, of course, are going to be
more concerned about inner-city problems than they would be about
a more widespread problem such as abortion that doesn't affect
them day-to-day. But we find cooperation from the priests; and
as a matter of fact, the bishops` program for respect
for human life, which will be kicked off on October
the 3rd, is presently enjoying tremendous support from the priests
throughout the country. Then you don't feel that this is
hurting the Church, this effort on abortion, and you don't
feel the Catholic Church is going to be turned into
a one-issue institution, as has been suggested? I can assure
you, it's not going to be turned into a one-issue
institution. As a matter of fact, the visibility given the
abortion issue has prodded us to look more closely at
all of the other issues and try to find consistency
between our concerns for the right to life of the
unborn and the right to life and the quality of
life of those already born. I doubt that it will
harm the Church's so-called image in this society because I
think people are fair-minded; they know that the Church has
a moral concern here, and they expect churches to have
moral concerns. Monsignor, thank you. Betsey Stengel is Associate Director
of the Religious Coalition for Abortion Rights, a national pro-abortion
group. Ms. Stengel, is your group doing anything to offset
the pro-life activities in this campaign, and if so, what?
We certainly are; we've been working for the last six
months at all levels of political activity. Most markedly, I
think, recently, we worked very closely to represent the Protestant-Jewish
communities` feeling in support of abortion rights for the Democratic
platform, and worked very closely with Mr. Carter's staff in
achieving that platform. We are now engaged in expressing very
strongly the feeling that the representation of abortion rights is
not there at the national political level. Neither candidate now
has a position which completely pleases us. Where are you
expressing it? We're not hearing it anywhere. I think there
are two aspects to that question. One is that our
people are actively writing letters to the candidates--I just
talked this morning to some people on Carter's staff, and
they are being swamped with protest letters at the moment.
The Protestant and Jewish community has requested a meeting with
both candidates, both Mr. Ford and Governor Carter, and we
are waiting now for...Similar to what the bishops did?
Right. We feel it's very important to...Has this been
formally done? Absolutely, and we have talked to both candidates`
headquarters and we are in the process of awaiting a
response; and in fact, today when we talked to Carter
headquarters again they informed us that they will be back
in touch very soon. We are also, next week, to
be hearing more on the public media platform from religious
leaders all over the country about the fact that the
Protestant and Jewish community are not being represented on this
issue. Alright, you said that neither one of these candidates`
positions particularly please you because both of them have said
they are opposed to abortion--as you would say, abortion
by choice--is that correct?
Right. I think there's definitely, as far as we are
concerned, is a difference between our support for Mr. Ford's
position and our support for Governor Carter's position. We totally
oppose a Constitutional amendment, and therefore we are totally opposed
to the Ford position. And we have no quarrel with
Mr. Carter's statement that he is personally opposed to abortion;
we certainly have room in our position for that. However,
we do oppose his position on federal funding of abortion,
and I believe that he has left himself open in
certain cases for allowing the feeling that he would support
a Constitutional amendment if it meant certain requirements means and
we are saying that we would not support any such
law. You have mentioned two or three times now the
Protestant-Jewish community, of course, Father
McHugh and Father Ratigan represent the Catholic community. Are we
on the verge of having a religious war over the
issue of abortion? I sincerely doubt it, and even more,
I sincerely hope not. I think, thank God, we have
reached the point in this country where we will not
have religious wars any more, war. I didn't mean war
literally, I meant a political...I know. I would be
willing to talk more in terms of a political war,
and I fear it not at all from the religious
community itself. What I really fear is, for instance, the
reports that we have had that Ford's staff member said:
they are going to play on the Catholic vote, and
more, they are going to play on the dichotomy between
the--the "cultural dichotomy," I think the word was--between
the Catholic and Baptists. And we should have passed that
period in our history and move on to getting along.
I think the religious community has reached the point where
at least we are trying to agree to disagree, and
the politics do not help the situation at the moment
and I hope the candidates do not try to divide
the religious community because of that. Thank you. Robin? Jeffrey
Pressman is a political science professor at M.I.T., and he's
working on a study of the 1976 Presidential election. Mr. Pressman,
you were with us last February when we discussed this
issue; you told us then you thought the abortion issue
was going to fade away. What happened? I guess, Mr.
MacNeil, that's one of the disadvantages of being two times
on the same program, as you have to live with
your own predictions. I think in the short run, as
was pointed out earlier, the issue did fade away after
the Iowa caucuses; and that's, I think, because the abortion
issue was linked to the candidacy of Ellen McCormick, who
was not an extremely potent candidate and ended up getting
a total of about 1.5% of the total vote cast.
Now, however, the abortion issue is being stressed by a
much more important candidate, President Ford, and I think that
that's one reason why it has surfaced again as an
issue. The difference in the two party platforms and the
work of making up those platforms, I think, also ensured
that it would become an issue; the bishops have, in
their public statements and apparently in the private meetings of
candidates, also been stressing the issue; and also the fact
that the election seems to be turning on some very
closely fought northern industrial states with large Catholic populations--all
of those things ensure, I think, that the issue will
receive visibility. Good. President Ford's campaign manager, James Baker, told
reporters this today: "It is a campaign issue whether we
like it or not; we are pleased it is an
issue because the bishops came out on our side." And
he added in response to questions that the issue could
bring in votes for Mr. Ford. Who is making points
on it, do you think, and who is it hurting?
Right now there's very little evidence that anybody is making
points on it. The recently released New York Times-CBS poll
showed that attitudes on abortion were not closely related to
attitudes toward candidates, and that in fact Mr. Carter was
doing better among those who supported a Constitutional amendment banning
abortion than among those who oppose such an amendment. However,
that may change; and in the short run it may,
as Mr. Baker hopes, work to President Ford's advantage, but
in the long run it may cause a backlash among
other voters; so I think it's much too early to
tell who it will help, and we certainly have no
hard evidence on that. I'd like to ask all of
you now, and start with Father Ratigan because I believe
I sensed in an earlier answer the seeds of this
question: do you believe that the pro-life forces are trying
to reach the right people in this campaign? After all,
how much influence does a President actually have on whether
a Constitutional amendment is achieved or not? Our political analyst
could tell us that better. Technically, he has nothing to
do with it; it's the Congress and in the states
that have to ratify; but I think that where we
have to put our emphasis as a church is at
least, in the beginning, at this stage of the game,
anyway--is on our own constituency. We find in polls
that only about a third of the Catholics themselves would
favor a Constitutional amendment at this time. But I think
that our better emphasis--although we're getting visibility because of
what's happening--but the long-range emphasis has to be on
the educational process. Monsignor, what do you think of that,
do you think the short-range publicity may be beneficial in
bringing the issue before the public but, as Father Ratigan
suggests, the long-range issue may not be so beneficial to
the Church following? Yes, I tend to agree with that.
I think that the short-range visibility brings it to the
attention of the whole country; I think that that accomplishes
an added dimension of the bishops` role--the bishops are
concerned, certainly, about reinforcing Catholic teaching for their own people.
But also, as religious leaders in a religiously pluralistic nation
they want to make a contribution to the public morality,
to draw public attention to the tragic consequences of an
abortion-on-request policy, such as we have today. So I think
that the high visibility that it achieves is accomplishing something
now. Our problem, or our challenge, is to make sure
that we are geared for the long-range effort and that
we are able to relate the abortion issue to a
wide variety of human rights issues about which we also
have a continuing concern. Do you agree with what Father
Ratigan said earlier, that Catholics are somewhat less inclined than
they were traditionally to follow instructions from the hierarchy, whether
from Rome or the American Catholic hierarchy, on these social
issues and that a politician who wanted to line up
the Catholic religious grouping on an issue like abortion couldn't
guarantee that simply because the hierarchy wanted them to take
one position they were going to in their private lives
or in their politics? I think we're going through an
experience where the teaching leadership of the Church is having
greater impact than it may have had in recent years.
However, I think that the leadership of the Church, in
fulfilling its role as teachers and as pastors, really is
not seeking to be political leadership at the same time.
So I think that the Catholics are attentive to the
moral teaching of their bishops and priests and I think
that they feel a legitimate freedom in regard to their
political activity, and I think the bishops want it that
way. The bishops are not meeting with Governor Carter or
Mr. Ford in order to endorse a candidate or to
interject this topic into the Presidential race. They have met
with them as candidates, they have spoken to them about
it because it's a highly important topic in our society.
But we have no intention of dictating the choice of
candidates--dictating the electoral choice--for our Roman Catholic people.
We feel that they can do that themselves. Is Mr.
Baker, the President's campaign manager, wrong in saying today the
bishops came out on our side? Yes, I think he's
wrong in saying that we came out on either candidate's
side, or that we came out, particularly, against either candidate.
Obviously, as a political analyst or a political activist, he'd
have a right to say whatever he wants. But we
did not see our role as coming out in favor
of either candidate. We feel that we wanted to call
the seriousness of the attention to both of them in
an emphatic way so that they would realize that it
matters to the Roman Catholic leadership and to their people.
Right. Thank you, Monsignor. Jim? Yes, the polls show, as
we have been talking about, and as Robin said at
the very beginning, that abortion is not now a major
concern of the majority of the voters in this country.
But I would like to ask each one of you
now to look ahead to the election: Could it become
a significant factor in deciding this election? What do you
think, Ms. Stengel? I don't think that it is going
to be the issue that makes up people's minds. There
are, no matter what anybody says, major issues facing Protestant,
Catholic and Jewish voters, and if you want to look
at exactly, for instance, why a Catholic urban voter is
going to make his or her decision, I am convinced
that that voter is going to be more concerned about
the kind of schools that his or her children go
to, whether there's going to be a paycheck coming in
in the next couple of months, whether they will be
able to afford that new car that they want. Abortion
may be one of ten issues that are basic in
the decision but I cannot believe that it makes up
the final decision. Dr. Pressman, what's your view on that
in terms of the long run? I know we put
you on the spot when you were on the program
before, and let me do it again: how important do
you think it's going to be on Election Day? Well,
Mr. Lehrer, I think I will change my position and
say that I think that it might well be a
very important issue on Election Day; it will never rank
very high in the electorate as a whole. Right now
I think Lou Harris finds it 27th of 27 among
issues; however, I think because the polls now show the
results in states like New York, Illinois, Pennsylvania and Michigan
to be so close, and because those states have a
high percentage of Catholic voters, that that issue may turn
out to be important, not only in and of itself,
but because abortion is also a code word for a
whole set of cultural attitudes. What do you mean by
that? I think that there is an uneasiness that the
polls are finding among northeast industrial state Catholic voters with
Jimmy Carter on a range of lifestyle and other issues.
Somehow, they don't feel comfortable with him; sometimes they can't
express specifically what they don't like, but there does seem
to be a Catholic problem for Jimmy Carter. His support
among Catholics is lower than a Democratic candidate might usually
expect to find and I think that abortion in a
sense is a symbol which voters may view as expressing
some of this uneasiness. I think that issues as Monsignor
McHugh pointed out earlier issues like the economy, and energy
and health care and education are hard, they're intractable, they're
complex. And therefore, symbolic issues like busing and abortion, over
which a President has really very little control--we're electing
a President, not a member of the Supreme Court. A
President doesn't have a great deal to do with the
Constitutional amendment process in those issues, but symbolic issues give
a voter a chance to express how he or she
feels in general, and register a protest, in a sense.
Father Ratigan, let me ask you, not as a political
scientist, but as a man who's around a lot of
Catholics on a regular basis, do you agree with Dr.
Pressman's assessment? Insofar as in those key states, I think
it might have some effect. I think that's what our
Board was concerned about, was that for many of their
people it is not a high-priority issue; that there are
a lot of other issues that the bishops have made
beautiful statements on, but don't seem to be getting the
visibility in this election campaign. And I think that's where
our concern was coming from, that at least, the impression
coming across to the majority of the board members was
that the bishops were kind of testing the candidates on
only one issue. Father McHugh, ten seconds. I think it
will be a highly important factor in some states and
it will be a decisive factor for some people. All
our polls have shown us that for a small percentage
of the electorate it can be a decisive factor, and
in a close race it can be highly important because
of that. That's what you want it to be, right?
No, we don't want it to be the decisive factor
in the choice of candidates; we want people to be
better aware of it so that we can carry the
long-range Congressional battle. Thank you, Monsignor. Robin? Yes. Thanks, Jim,
and thank you all very much. Jim Lehrer and I
will be back tomorrow evening. I'm Robert MacNeil. Good night.
