content
Good evening, and Happy New Year. Today marks the first
day for a lot of things, but in one industry
in particular -- an industry that touches all our lives -- today
is the beginning of a brave new world, the industry
is banking, which is about to be revolutionized by a
lifting of government regulations beginning today, making the business more
competitive, blurring the distinctions between commercial banks and savings and
loan associations. The changes are designed to benefit the consumer,
but it may be a long time before the dust
settles enough to make clear just who gains. Many savings
and loan people think that deregulation is rigged against them
in favor of the big commercial banks. Some fear the
competition will wipe out many savings and loans and dry
up money for house mortgages. What is clear is that
a fierce battle for banking profit and survival lies ahead
and that`s what we consider tonight -- the battle of the
banks. Jim? Robin, the specific changes that go into effect
today are these. Banks, all kinds -- savings and loans, mutual
savings associations included -- can now offer checking accounts, and they
can pay interest on the money in those accounts; that`s
the so-called NOW account. The maximum interest an institution can
pay today is 5 1/4 percent, but over the next
six years that also is going to gradually change. Under
the guidance of a six-member deregulation board all interest ceilings
on all accounts will be eliminated by 1986 and thus
be subject to the open competitive market. Also, the board
has already eliminated the 1/4 percent more differential that savings
and loans can pay for savings certificates; the differential on
passbook savings may soon follow. To compensate for this, savings
and loans can now enter the full consumer loan market,
make car loans, issue credit cards, broaden their investments from
home mortgages and do other things that in the past
only commercial banks could do. All of these changes and
more are contained in a new law called the Depository
Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act of 1980. It passed
Congress last March. It passed into practice today. Robin? For
a view of what the new competitive world of banking
may mean to consumers, we turn to Marshall Loeb, managing
editor of Money Magazine. Mr. Loeb, how will the new
laws benefit ordinary banks customers? The new laws, Robin, mean
more competition and more choice; and as there is competition
and choice, of course it will be helpful to people
who are coming closer now to one-stop banking where you
can go to one institution, get your mortgage, get your
credit card, have your checking account which will draw interest,
have your savings account as well. The other major factor
is that those of us who have had checking accounts
and have had our money in there drawing no money
on it will now get interest upon those deposits if
we choose. Could you describe one type of bank customer
who will benefit most from the new competition? Probably that
customer who has got a fairly large checking account because
if your account drops below a certain so-called minimum balance,
then you will have to pay either a fee or
a charge per check or both. Now, that minimum balance
will vary bank by bank. In general it will be
from $500 to $2,500, in some cases as much as
$3,000. If you have a fairly large account, you will
be drawing interest with no penalty on your checking deposits.
These NOW accounts have been in practice now in New
Jersey and New York for -- And six New England states.
-- and six New England states, for a couple of years.
How have they worked out? I mean, are customers really
benefiting from them? Those, of course, who have had their
money in such accounts have indeed benefited. But at least
they have had the choice. Anybody who now can make
that decision can determine for himself if his financial situation
is such that it pays him to go into a
NOW account. I would argue that it is much better
to have that choice than not to have the choice.
How will raising, and six years later eliminating, the ceiling
on interest that can be paid on savings accounts, how
is that going to help people? Well, the -- that certainly
will help people in that they will be getting more
of a market rate or a competitive rate for their
savings deposits. Now, I would argue, there is discrimination. People,
mostly small savers who have their money in savings banks,
get federal limits on the amount of interest they may
draw. Those who have larger sums of money can put
them in money market funds or other instruments that would
pay much higher interest. So this brings the small saver
up level with the personal? Very gradually it will bring
the small saver up. Indeed, now in savings institutions you
get only 5¼ to 5½ percent on your savings. What
about negative effects? Some people, as I said in the
beginning, in savings and loan fear that mortgage money is
going to dry up as a result of this, because
they won`t do well and therefore the natural source of
mortgage money won`t happen. The savings and loan people are
very worried that the elimination of the one-quarter-point differential -- which
of course will not happen for five years -- will be
very hurtful to them, and of course the savings and
loan institutions are so important in mortgage finance. However, I
think there is a strong case that what is hurting
the mortgage market in this country is just the competition
from all sorts of other instruments that pay much higher
interest than savings and loan institutions now pay. Just consider
the enormous growth of money market funds, some of which
pay 12 percent and now in a few instances even
more. Certainly they are drawing huge sums away from those
institutions that would now pay only 5 1/2 percent. Well
thank you. Jim? There are those in the savings and
loan business crying foul over all of this deregulation. They
claim they`ve been set up to be had by the
big commercial banks. John Hardin is one of those who
think so. He`s president of the First Federal Savings and
Loan in Rock Hill, South Carolina, and he`s the former
president of his industry`s trade association, the U.S. League of
Savings Associations. What are you upset about, Mr. Hardin? Well,
we`ve been caught in quite a squeeze. You see, we`ve --
all of our loans in the past have been on
a fixed rate, and now when the escalation of money
has gone up so fast, Mr. Lehrer, we are not
in a position to keep up with it as my
friends in the commercial banking area. And we are supposed
to be putting all of our -- most of our funds
into mortgage loans. As a matter of fact, this country
is a country of homeowners mainly because of savings and
loans. We have made the bulk of the home loans
for the last 150 years. This is the thing we
want to continue to do. We want our business to
be basically centered toward home ownership in this country. What
will prevent you from doing that? Well, right now we`re
paying, for instance, 15.6 percent for savings, on money market
certificates, trying to be competitive, where our mortgage rate that
we`re receiving is only 15¼, and of course this can`t
go on. The high interest rates in the country -- and
I`m delighted that Senator Garn is here, because he has
been a great -- He`s the incoming chairman of the banking
committee. We`re going to talk to him in a moment.
Yes indeed. And he`s done a great deal to help
us and we`re looking forward to one specific thing, and
that is, an incentive for savings for the people of
this country, some type -- right now we have a $200
and a $400 tax-free savings. We -- he, I think, is
in favor of $1,000 and $2,000, or something of that
nature. This would be of tremendous effect. But what about
the savings and loan? I mean, under the -- where deregulation
is going, everybody`s going to be free to compete. Well,
I was interested in Mr. Loeb`s remark that the -- five
years from now the differential would be done away with.
It was done away with six weeks after the committee
went into effect. They were supposed to have a six-year,
gradual phase-out of the differential. And instead, in six weeks,
their first meeting, they phased the entire thing out. But
not for passbooks, yet. They haven`t done that yet, have
they? No, sir. This was where -- but where our bulk
of our money is coming from right now. See, we
are losing passbook money and it`s going into money market
certificates, so the cost of our money is just escalating.
And we really are not the ones that are getting
hurt as much as the homebuilder and the electrician and
the plumber and the painter and all of the millions
of people in this country that are involved in homebuilding.
But also, under the deregulation law aren`t you free now
to go out and compensate for this and get in
the car loan business and open checking accounts? Yes, sir.
But let`s take the NOW accounts they were just talking
about. This is really of no real help to us
so far as improving our profit situation. It`ll be a
service and we`re glad to offer it, but it will
not be a real profitable service. Now, we were given
checking accounts, so to speak, or NOW accounts, but not
commercial checking accounts. So in effect the savings and loans
were given the loss leader, you see. And where the
commercial banks really make money on checking accounts is in
the commercial accounts. We don`t have that. Well, what do
you think the impact of all of this is going
to be on your industry? Well, in the first place
most of our savings and loans are small, as I
am -- 80 percent are under $100 million in assets. And
they are having a difficult time adjusting to bringing out
all these new services: NOW accounts, consumer loans, automobile loans.
And we especially -- You mean, because you have to hire
people and all that sort of thing? Yes, sir. And
learn specifically how to go about making these types of
loans that the banks have been doing for years. You
see, the commercial banks were set up in this country
years ago to do a specific job, and they`ve done
a wonderful job, and I want to congratulate them. They`ve
kept the wheels of industry turning. We were set up
150 years ago to provide home ownership to the people
of this nation. We have done it. I`m saying -- and
we did it with that little tiny differential, you see.
One-quarter? One-quarter, to attract money into savings and loans. But
somehow that -- Well now, wait. Yeah. Okay. Now, if we
did get the money with that little differential -- the commercial
banks have prospered -- and I`m proud of them -- more than
they ever have for the past ten years or so.
We have done the same up until the last year.
So if we`re both doing our job and doing it
well, why rock the boat? But the ceiling`s removed. And
interest rates are going to go up -- in other words,
the interest that can be paid to people. What in
the world is a ¼ of a percent going to
do? Well, right now it`s kind of problematical. Right now,
under the present -- this is extreme times, with interest rates,
the prime rate, centered at 20 percent. We`re talking about
when we get back to something more normal than we`re
living in now, because I don`t think that anybody agrees
that we can continue in these types of interest-rate climate.
But it does make a difference, and you want it
back? Yes, sir. Thank you. Robin? Now the other side
of the picture from the perspective of the commercial banks.
Sandra McLoughlin is senior vice president of Pittsburgh`s Mellon Bank,
the 16th largest bank in the country. Ms. McLoughlin has
been active on committees of the American Bankers Association and
in lobbying on banking issues. Ms. McLoughlin, how do you
and your bank feel about the new environment? Well, I
think, Robin, if you go back awhile in time, not
only at the Mellon Bank but throughout the commercial banking
industry, it`s entirely fair to say that the changes we`re
seeing taking place now, effective January 1, have been in
the making for a very long time. I think it`s
entirely proper, and I think I speak for our industry --
I think it`s entirely proper that we begin to see
a phasing out of reg Q, and more attractive rates
for the saver. Like Mr. Hardin, we`re very concerned with
the low propensity to save in this country. And it
would seem that the savers need some market rate incentive.
We believe that the phasing out of reg Q will
do that. "Reg Q" being? Reg Q being that regulation
which controls the interest rates paid to savers. Yeah. How
do you think customers are going to benefit? I think
customers will benefit -- I can only agree with Mr. Loeb`s
earlier comments. By and large, while there are some problematic
dimensions, perhaps, to the changes -- by and large I think
it`s a good thing that customers have more choices, not
fewer. It seems to me that the message to consumers
in all of this is that -- is really twofold. One
is that any sum of money, however small by relative
standards -- any sum of money, if it`s yours, is worth
shopping for. It`s worth shopping different financial institutions to find
the best kind of use for your money, the best
rate you can be paid for the money. That`s point
one. And point two is that in fact the issues
are becoming more complicated. Along with the choices comes, of
course, added complication. That means that consumers are going to
probably have to pay a little closer attention to what
their bank is giving them versus what the competition is
giving them. What do you say to Mr. Hardin`s complaint
that the deck`s been stacked against them -- the regulators have
left you, the commercial banks, with the most profitable part
of the business, which are corporate checking accounts and loans,
and has given them very little? Well, I think the
fact is that we have been competing for a very
long time in the consumer lending arena, that the advent
of commercial banking in the consumer arena is not new
at all. I think it`s entirely appropriate. I believe I
speak for our industry in this respect. It`s entirely appropriate
that we now level the playing field. Just as Mr.
Hardin is -- has talked at some length about his unhappiness
at eliminating the differential for all of the reasons that
he might be unhappy, we see this as a plus
not just for commercial banks but for the consumers, because
at long last, once again the choices are expanded for
the consumer. All right. I noticed in the Wall Street
Journal that a Mr. W.C. Smith, a Realtor from your
city, Pittsburgh, said in an interview that the new law
was an obituary for the savings and loans. Do you
regard it that way? I don`t regard it that way
at all, Robin. It seems to me that there is
always room for any well-managed institution. I would have to
agree with Mr. Hardin that probably the savings and loans
have a greater adjustment to make at this juncture. On
the other hand, I think we`ve all, including Mr. Hardin --
- I think we`ve seen this coming for awhile. So there
has been some preparatory time. It`s not as though January
1, `81 we woke up on that morning and the
banking laws were changed. This has been in the making
for a good long time. All things considered, I think
there are - - there is room for any well-managed institution, and
that includes small savings and loans, just as it has
for years included small commercial banks. Do you expect small
banks and neighborhood banks to go out of business as
a result of the new competitive wind? I don`t at
all. And I think the proof of the pudding is
the great diversity of size of commercial banking. If you
start from the premise that savings and loans are now
moving into an arena of very much broadened consumer banking
powers -- if you start from that premise and now look
at the small commercial banks across the country, who have
been largely, for many years, in the consumer business, not
in the corporate business, then you have to assume that
just as small commercial banks have survived for many, many
years, so, too, will the savings and loans survive. What
I believe will happen, as has happened with small commercial
banks, is that with increasing frequency we will see the
smaller bank going to the larger bank for some automated
support, and for some expertise that makes it possible -- buying
those services, and making it thereby possible for the small
bank to offer the broadest possible range of services to
its marketplace. Well, thank you. Jim? If Congress is to
make any new changes or adjustments in its deregulation of
the financial business, it would most likely have to be
done with the approval and support of Senator Jake Garn,
Republican of Utah. As of next Monday, Senator Garn becomes
chairman of the Senate Banking Committee. Senator, you`ve heard this
discussion. What`s your view of how deregulation of the banking
business is going so far? Jim, let me say I`ve
heard this discussion for six long years of committee hearings,
of testimony, of markups. This all did start even before
that, many years before that. In 1975, the Senate passed
the Financial Institutions Act, which was not passed by the
House of Representatives. And then each year the Senate has
passed similar legislation. The House has been reluctant. Finally, in
this year, through 1979 and into 1980, the House and
the Senate, after some long, long negotiations -- finally agreed to
what you have referred to as the Financial Institutions Deregulation
Act. It is a series of compromises. If I could
write it it would be quite different. But obviously when
you have a conference committee between the House and the
Senate there`s a great deal of give and take, and
a lot of this came out late one night. Overall,
I agree with it. But there are nine sections of
this bill. We`ve only discussed one or two. There are
many other things, like mandatory reserves for all financial institutions
now, rather than voluntary, the way I would have preferred.
There`s simplification of truth-in-lending. So it`s a very complex thing.
And I do think there will have to be some
adjustments made in the future. I`ve said that all along:
that once we came out with what appeared to be
a level playing field, we would find out that it
was not, and there were some advantages of some parts
of the financial community, and disadvantages. I think Congress is
going to have to take a look at how it
is working. And I do think we`ll be back with
amendments in the future. Do you think the savings and
loans people have a legitimate complaint, as Mr. Hardin outlined
it? What I said just before we went on the
air, that I thought all three segments of the financial
community deserved what they got, because, although individuals, like Mr.
Hardin, are saying exactly what they`ve said to me for
years -- "We don`t want to be a commercial bank; we
don`t want NOW accounts; we don`t want these expanded authorities"
-- their associations and their lobbying groups have been saying otherwise.
And their pressure has been very great, from the ABA,
from the U.S. Savings and Loan League, saying, "We want
to keep everything we have in the way of authority,
but we want a piece of what this group is
doing." And the credit unions wanted share drafts, and they
wanted expanded authorities. I don`t mean to be unkind when
I say they got what they deserve, but if they`d
been content -- But that`s what they did, right? Yeah. And
they`ll say, "Well, hey, they shouldn`t get what they got,
but we want what" -- the typical -- "our own ax is
being ground, or ox is being gored." And so I
think there are going to have to be some adjustments
as a result of that. But the major problem of
the savings and loan right now is not the deregulation
bill. That is minor compared to the condition of this
economy. And it is incredible, the cost of money -- and
they are, a lot of them, in great trouble, because
of 20 and 21 percent prime interest rates. If we
could get the economy back under control, get Congress under
control, start balancing the budget and reducing federal expenditures, and
get the economy in some sort of balance and level
playing field, I don`t think the S&Ls and other small
financial institutions are going to be in trouble, but they`re
going to be dropping like flies unless we do our
job. Mr. Hardin, though, is saying -- pretty much he`s saying
that these savings and loans cannot compete against the commercial
banks, and that, as he said, 80 percent of them
are very small, and that this business of what is
in the bill -- the NOW accounts and all of that --
- is going to cost them a lot of money and
it`s going to be very difficult for them. Many of
them may go under. That is why with regulation Q
being phased out, the interest rate differential, the quarter percent,
at the expanded authorities to give flexibility for mortgage loans
like commercial banks have had for years, to give them
NOW accounts, and to give them other authorities, to compensate
for the loss of that. I`m not sure yet, that
that does fully compensate them for that. That`s one of
the things we`re going to have to take a look
at when we see how it works. But I think
there`s a much bigger threat, whether it`s small banks or
small savings and loans, and that is the big superbanks.
And here we get into what we`re talking about, interstate
branching. And I fear in the longer run seeing ten
or twelve big banks in this country having thousands of
branches all over the country. That is the real threat,
in my opinion, to small savings and loans and small
banks. And I don`t want that to happen. I think
small -- But isn`t that the price you might have to
pay for deregulation, to leave things to the open marketplace?
Well, now we`re talking about something different here than taking
away interest rates. You`re right, and I should never have
asked that question. Let me give it to Robin real
fast. Senator. Thank you. Robin? Mr. Hardin, the Senator says
that your industry, perhaps not you personally, got what you
deserved and what your lobbying groups have been asking for.
Well, there`s been a great difference of opinion on that.
And actually the great bulk of our people have wanted
to remain a savings and loan in our old standard
of making home loans. Now, I would like to clear
up one thing, Jim, that you said that -- someone said
that maybe some of us would be going under and
that type of thing. A number of our associations will
have a difficult time and will not, say, make money
this year. However, this -- we have adequate reserves, I want
to be sure that everyone understands. We have the Federal
Home Loan Bank, our system, that controls us, standing behind
us, that has the opportunity to borrow from the Treasury,
to issue their own bonds. And we have the FSLIC
that insures each account up to $100,000. So there`s really
no alarm here about any of us going under. It`s
a matter of, can we continue to attract enough profitable
money in order to do the job that we were
put here to do? Mr. Hardin, I heard Mr. Loeb
agree vehemently when the Senator said a minute ago that
your real problem is with the state of the economy
and not from this act at the moment. I agree
with that. I agree with that a hundred percent, that
it -- Let`s give Mr. Loeb a chance to state it
here. I think we have to stress, once again, that
there is a major difference between deregulation and -- I find
it very difficult in this economy, where everybody is complaining
about the extreme regulation, to argue against deregulation. There is
a difference between deregulation and the high rates. If the
savings and loan associations, and the mortgage market in general,
are in difficulty now, it is because of the incredibly
high rates and the volatility of those rates, so that
those institutions cannot plan ahead. Will that danger be passed
if the rates go down soon? If the rates -- indeed,
if the rates go down and stay at some reasonable
level. We must question, of course, what is reasonable. Is --
when some of us are carrying 5 and 6 percent
mortgages from not so long ago, is a prime rate
of 20 or 21 percent reasonable? Is a prime rate
of 12 percent reasonable? Indeed, we absolutely have to get
this economy stable and fight the inflation in order to
bring down those rates. Senator Garn, Mr. Hardin said they
were going to fight to get that quarter percent, or
whatever it is, differential back. Is there any likelihood of
Congress restoring the differential? I would not think so. Certainly
not in this particular year, unless some of their predictions
do start to come true. But my own feeling is,
is that the differential will be phased out, and, as
I`ve said before, the most important thing we can do --
not only for savings and loan, but the consumers of
this country -- is get the economy under control. And then
I don`t think the quarter of a percent becomes nearly
as important as what they are paying -- the cost of
money now, with these tremendously high money market certificates. That`s
where -- if you look at the statistics on the savings
and loan, that`s where they`re losing their money for mortgages
to, the transfer to the money market certificates, not because
of the quarter percent eventually being phased out. Ms. McLoughlin,
on a slightly different point that the Senator also made,
does your bank foresee all this leading inevitably to interstate
branching and to a dozen or so big national banks
with many branches? I think we very much see on
the horizon some loosening, or some expansion, of branching laws.
And I would presume the ultimate of that would be
interstate branching. I don`t think we have ever seen that
as meaning that the small bank will disappear. I think
it will heighten the competition, and I think each time,
classically and historically, when competition is heightened in any industry
there are some who fall by the wayside because there
are some who cannot compete. But I would not see
the extension of branching laws or the easing of branching
laws as being any more devastating in that regard -- any
more devastating than any other kind of added competitive component.
And in the final analysis I believe fervently that the
added competition can only be good for the customers of
the financial institutions. You don`t see it quite that way,
Senator Garn? Well, this is probably not a very good
example. But, how many corner grocery stores do you see
any more? And I guess the point can be made
from competition from the giant supermarkets that the consumer has
benefited, and I`m sure there are many benefits to that.
But there`s also many lost benefits. At this point in
time, I`m not willing to give up on some tremendous
personal services given by small banks and savings and loan
and credit unions in this country, to be dominated by
ten or twelve huge superbanks in this country that I
don`t think you`ll get the same service from. I have
to leave it there, I`m afraid, Senator Garn. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Hardin, Ms. McLoughlin, for joining us. Mr.
Loeb in New York. Good night, Jim. Good night, Robin.
That`s all for tonight. We will be back tomorrow night.
I`m Robert MacNeil. Good night.
