content
Good evening, I'm Gwen Ifill, Jim Lehrer is off today.
On the NewsHour tonight, Ray Suarez introduces us to three
new faces for the proposed Bush cabinet; we examine the
already contentious fight over the nominee for Attorney General; and
Elizabeth Farnsworth takes us into the middle of the thorny
dispute over Palestinians who want to return to Israel. It
all follows our summary of the news this Tuesday. President-elect
Bush rounded out his cabinet today. He tapped a Democrat,
Commerce Secretary Norman Mineta, to head the Transportation Department. He
also picked former Reagan administration official, Linda Chavez for Labor
Secretary and outgoing Michigan Senator Spencer Abraham as Energy Secretary.
He said his nominees show the kind of leader he
will be. I believe the American people want a President
who seeks the best. People from all walks of life
who are strong, experienced, capable Americans. I'm going to work
with every cabinet member to set a series of goals
for each cabinet, for each area of our government, and
I'll work with the cabinet secretaries to help achieve those
goals. But I fully expect to get...I fully expect
to be given straightforward talk, honest opinion, and I expect
people to work for one thing in mind: That which
is best for America. And I'm proud of this cabinet.
We'll have more about today's cabinet selections right after this
News Summary. Palestinian leader Arafat met with President Clinton at
the White House today. He wanted clarification of U.S. proposals
for a Middle East peace agreement. The proposals would grant
Palestinians partial control in East Jerusalem. But Palestinian refugees would
give up their right to return to Israel. White House
spokesman Jake Siewert said the President hopes for progress before
he leaves office in three weeks. The time is of
the essence here. We have a relatively narrow window of
opportunity, but the President has promised to work up to
the last day, and there's no reason why these negotiations--
if they commence--could not be successful. But ultimately it's
up to the parties to decide to sit down and
to make the hard choices that are involved. In Jerusalem,
Israeli Prime Minister Barak said it was unlikely there would
be any peace accord before the Israeli elections next month.
And the violence in the region continued today. In Gaza,
Israeli troops killed a Palestinian man and wounded seven. And
roadside bombs wounded two Israeli soldiers. There were significant lapses
in U.S. security in the Persian Gulf before the attack
on the U.S.S. "Cole." That's what a Pentagon commission has
concluded, according to reports today by major news organizations. They
cite a communications breakdown between embassies and military commanders. The
"Cole" was ripped by a suicide bomb blast on October
12th, in the port of Aden, Yemen. On Wall Street
today, stocks dropped on continuing fears about lackluster corporate earnings.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average lost 140 points to close
at 10,646. The NASDAQ Index fell 178 points or about
7.2% to close at 2291. That's it for the News
Summary tonight, now it's on to the Bush cabinet choices,
and the Ashcroft controversy, plus the Palestinians' right of return
to Israel. Three new faces for the President-elect's cabinet, one
a Democrat, and to Ray Suarez. The three final cabinet
appointments came late this afternoon at a press conference in
Austin. Mr. Bush's choice to head the Energy Department, Michigan
Senator Spencer Abraham, lost his seat to Democrat Debbie Stabenow
last year. The one-term, 48-year-old Senator is a fiscal conservative
whose grandparents were Lebanese immigrants. Abraham served in the previous
Bush administration as deputy chief of staff to Vice President
Dan Quayle. Many significant Energy Department-related issues face us at
this time, ranging from the adequacy of supply to affordability,
to the development of new technologies, to the issues of
security at our facilities and more. Fortunately, this administration is
comprised of many individuals with incredible expertise in these areas,
and I look forward to helping the President-elect to effectively
address these challenges in the days ahead. Linda Chavez, the
President-elect's pick for Labor Secretary, is the second Hispanic selected
for a cabinet post. Chavez is President of the Center
for Equal Opportunity, a conservative research organization in Washington, DC.
She served as White House Director of Public Liaison and
Director of the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights in the
Reagan administration. She ran for Senate from Maryland in 1986,
but lost. Today, Chavez thanked her father, who was a
house painter, and her mother, who worked in restaurants and
department stores. If I am confirmed as Secretary of Labor,
I intend to keep faith with the men and the
women who still work at jobs like those my parents
held. I hope also to seek out new opportunities to
increase the skills and the productivity of all Americans, to
promote safe working conditions, and to administer the nation's labor
laws. I intend to vigorously enforce the Department's regulations to
guarantee nondiscrimination by federal contractors. And I want to work
with employers to ensure that the Department of Labor assists
the private sector in expanding economic opportunity and job growth.
In naming current Commerce Secretary Norman Mineta to be Transportation
Secretary, President-elect Bush fulfilled a promise to name a Democrat
to his cabinet. President Clinton tapped the 69-year-old Mineta to
be Secretary of Commerce last summer. Mineta was a Senior
Vice President of Transportation Systems and Services at Lockheed Martin.
He served as a Democratic Congressman from California for 20
years, chairing the House Committee on Public Works and Transportation
and the Aviation Subcommittee. Mineta was also the mayor of
San Jose. Over the last year, this country has witnessed
a very hard-fought election, and I was proud to stand
with my party. I have been honored to serve in
President Clinton's cabinet as Secretary of Commerce. I am a
Democrat--with both a small "d" and a large one--
and I am proud of and committed to my party's
principles and its heritage. However, the campaign is over, and
under our constitutional system, a decision has been rendered. And
we are now in the essential transition period when we
move from campaigning to governance. As you have said time
and time again, Mr. President-elect, the challenge before all of
us as Americans, regardless of party affiliation, is to find
those areas where we can build bipartisan consensus on the
policies and the programs that are needed to move this
nation forward. I believe that there is no more fertile
ground for building a bipartisan consensus on what is necessary
and right for our country than in the area of
transportation policy. There are no Democratic or Republican highways, no
such thing as Republican or Democratic traffic congestion, no such
thing as Republican or Democratic aviation and highway safety. Cargo
is not shipped by Republican or Democratic railroad ships, barges,
or pipelines. Our national transportation policy must have one overriding
bipartisan goal, and that is to give our economy the
tools and the infrastructure it needs in order to create
and sustain growth and prosperity. After announcing his cabinet appointments,
Mr. Bush took questions on a variety of topics this
afternoon including energy policy. Mr. President-elect, OPEC plans to cut
oil production by a million and a half barrels on
January 17th. Are you concerned this will affect the current
heating oil situation or raise gas prices in the future?
And would you consider raising the issue with the Saudis
or other OPEC members before that January 17 meeting? No,
the nation needs to speak with one voice. We have
one President. But the fact that OPEC is thinking about
reducing the world supply of crude oil and thereby affecting
the price at the pump and the price of heating
oil indicates the need for us to have an energy
policy that makes us less dependent on foreign sources of
crude. The ideal world is one in which we don't
have to worry about somebody reducing supplies on the world
markets. We've got a long way to go from there.
But we need to be exploring, in an environmentally sensitive
way, for oil and gas here at home. Secondly, a
cornerstone of our diplomatic efforts will be to work with
our friends in the Middle East, particularly as it relates
to matters of energy. But know the President of the
United States will be the President until January 20th, and
our nation will speak with one voice. Mr. President-elect, can
you talk about why you feel it's important to have
a Democrat in your cabinet besides the qualifications of Mr.
Mineta--the symbolism you feel it might bring. You bet.
First, I don't want to skip over the qualifications. This
man is perfectly suited for the job. He made a
career in the halls of Congress focusing on transportation issues
with a philosophy that we share. And I can't wait
for people in our party to hear Norm talk about
his vision for transportation. But it's also important to send
a signal that this is an administration that recognizes talent
when we see it regardless of political party. And this
is an extraordinarily talented American. I love his story. I'm
so honored that he agreed to join the administration, and
he's going to make a great addition. I wish everybody
a continued happy New Year. I look forward to seeing
you at the next availability. And now, how this is
playing on Capitol Hill? We're joined by two Senate leaders,
Republican Don Nickles of Oklahoma, the assistant majority leader, and
Democrat Harry Reid of Nevada, the minority whip. Senator Nickles,
maybe we could start with you. You heard the President-elect
talk about the significance of appointing a Democrat to the
cabinet. It came in the last series of appointments, something
he said he wanted to do. As a member of
the Senate, what do you see as the significance? Well,
I like President-elect Bush doing what he said he's going
to do. I compliment him on his choice. I've known
Norm Mineta, I served with him when he was in
the House. He has a lot of respect. He did
a good job over at Commerce for President Clinton. And
I think he'll do a very good job as Secretary
of Transportation for President Bush. Senator Reid, same question. What
do you see as the significance of the appointment of
a Democrat to the cabinet? I think it's very important.
I think Secretary Cohen has been an outstanding person for
America. He certainly hasn't hurt his Republican credentials. I think
Norm Mineta will be a good Democrat and do a
great job with transportation. Frankly, I don't know of anyone
in America that could have been chosen that knows more
about transportation than Norm Mineta. He served on the very
large infrastructure committee in the House, has 45 or 50
members. Maybe they've raised it to 60 now. It's a
huge committee. He's done the bill with us every five
years, the very important transportation bill. He's worked in the
private sector. I just think he will be a great
Secretary of Transportation. Is there a...while there's a similarity
in the numbers, a quantitative parity, is there a qualitative
difference between the portfolios? Was it a more significant thing
to make a Bill Cohen Secretary of Defense one of
the top jobs in the cabinet as opposed to making
a Democrat Secretary of Transportation? I felt all along that
we should have some parity, that it would have been
nice to have a Secretary of State, Secretary of Defense,
maybe an Attorney General, but, you know, we got what
we got and Norm Mineta is a qualified guy and
the President-elect has a right to pick anyone he wants.
We'll have to take each of them at face value,
have some hearings and see how things go. I don't
want the fact that Mineta wasn't chosen for Secretary of
Defense or one of the bigger positions to take away
from his qualifications. He is going to be real good.
Senator Nickles, is it an apples-to-apples comparison when you take
a look at the two departments and their prestige within
the cabinet? Well, I just think you look at the
appointments that President-elect Bush has made, I think they're outstanding.
If you look at the top positions, Colin Powell, Don
Rumsfeld, Paul O'Neill, those are outstanding people. Norm Mineta, as
my colleague Senator Reid said, he's exceptionally well qualified for
Secretary of Transportation. So he's got an all-star cabinet. I
think he did a fantastic job putting the cabinet together.
And I compliment him for doing it so quickly. That
was more difficult than one would anticipate because the election
took so long, but I think he's got a great
cabinet and I think they'll they will be a real
credit to America, and my compliments to the President for
putting together so quickly. Well, you mentioned that the election
took so long. In fact, the Bush process of appointing
the cabinet was shorter than a lot of modern Presidents.
He did it rather quickly, and now that we've seen
the shape of the complete proposed cabinet, what do you
think it says about how the President-elect intends to govern?
Well, I think it speaks very well for him. I
think it's a cabinet of almost unequaled stature from the
top positions all the way down. These are people who
are enormously well qualified, who can do a fantastic job,
who have a great deal of credibility, leadership, stature already
on their own. So, these aren't individuals that are going
to need on-the-job training, that are going to be overwhelmed
by bureaucracy or...and that could easily happen. All these
cabinet-level positions, they all have thousands of employees. They're enormously
complex. I think he's got some great people who will,
you know, grab the challenge and work with Congress. Most
all of them are professionals in the fact that they've
managed businesses or they've had enough experience either in the
Pentagon or in Congress that I think they'll work with
Congress--Democrats and Republicans--to get some positive accomplishments for
our country. But, Senator Nickles, when you look at their
backgrounds, when you look at the ideological strands of the
party that they represent, does this proposed cabinet reflect the
closeness of the election, the closeness of the national legislature?
Well, I just think it's an outstanding cabinet with very
good, qualified people. Again, whether you're talking about Don Rumsfeld
or you're talking about Paul O'Neill or John Ashcroft, several
of these people, these are outstanding people who are enormously
well qualified who, I think, will do a fantastic job
for our country. Senator Reid, you wanted to say? Ray,
I think that we have to realize that these people
haven't yet been confirmed by the Senate. I accept every
one of them at face value. I think we have
to say the President-elect has a right to choose anyone
he wants and he's done that. But now we go
into the hearing process. And I think, generally speaking, these
people are going to be confirmed but we know that
there are things that are going to come up during
the hearings as, I think, Linda Chavez, that's going to
be an interesting hearing. I think we're going to find
out what she has written about...you know, anyone that's
written a lot, we have to say, have they in
effect Borked themselves, that is, going back to the Bork
Supreme Court nomination he'd written so much that he wound
up trapping himself. We'll have to see what she has
written. We'll have to see what she's said. We have
to look at the Secretary of Interior very closely, Gale
Norton, to find out if her close association with Secretary
Watt has been something that disqualifies her. At this stage
I know nothing. I think we have to look at
our former colleague, John Ashcroft, who I think he's a
very fine man. But there are people who need to
look at what he said to find out what his
involvement was with the Ronnie White episode, to find out
if he's willing to enforce the laws as it relates
to clinic violence and other things. At this stage--I
repeat--at face value they're all fine, good people, but
the hearing process develops and goes off on tangents, we've
learned during the past 25 years, that develop different scenarios.
We'll have to wait and see. I do say this
in support of my counterpart on the Republican side: I
really think that President-elect Bush has done a good job
in getting these people to us very quickly. In years
past, we've waited and waited and waited for these nominations
to come to us. We, the Senate, have no problem
now. We can't blame it on Bush that we're not
doing these hearings hurriedly, that he's holding us up. It's
up to us to get a government in place as
quickly as we can. Well, Senator Nickles, you just heard
maybe not the Democratic Party's playbook but a couple names
have come up that may bring some added scrutiny. Are
you concerned about one or another of the various designates
having a rough time when it comes time for hearings?
No, I don't, Ray. I will just guess that all
of his nominees will be confirmed by overwhelming votes. That
doesn't mean we won't have some serious questions before the
confirmation process. Usually you hear people say, oh, they're really
going after John Ashcroft. I know John Ashcroft. I think
most of our colleagues know him. He's an outstanding Senator,
former governor, former Attorney General. You couldn't be more qualified
for the position of Attorney General. He had eight years
as Attorney General in Missouri, graduated from distinguished law schools
and was an outstanding Senator, happened to serve on the
Judiciary Committee. I think he's eminently qualified. I think he
will be confirmed with the rest and Gale Norton, I
happen to have known her. She was a candidate for
the Senate a few years ago. She will do a
very good job as secretary. So, anyway, I'm confident that
President-elect Bush has made some great nominations and they'll stand
up to the scrutiny of the confirmation process. One of
the things I hope that we'll do is make sure
we don't go into the Bork process and "Bork" somebody.
I hope that we don't try and crucify somebody because
they happen to be nominated for a cabinet-level position. We
need to review their records; we need to find out
where they stand on issues, but my guess is that
the Senate is going to start conducting itself a little
more appropriately, maybe the way we did several years ago,
where most nominees will be confirmed in pretty short order.
Well, during this small window of time between the naming
of the cabinet members and the beginning of the confirmation
process, is the fax machine in your office warm to
the touch? Is the phone ringing off the hook? What
happens about now for sitting Senators? Well, I'll let my
colleague answer right now. There's always intense scrutiny on anything
they've ever said or written. My friend, Senator Reid, said
something about Linda Chavez. She's been on TV; she's written
a lot. And so I'm sure they'll find some ammo
and maybe some people will try and destroy her record.
But I know her well, and she'll be an outstanding
Secretary of Labor and I'm sure she'll be confirmed as
well. But anything they've ever written, ever said, will be
used either for them or against them, but again with
this caliber of nominations, I think they'll all get through.
Senator Reid, are you starting to hear from advocacy groups
on one side or another? Of course. But the one
thing I want to elaborate on what Don has said:
You know, this nomination process is very difficult. Filling out
the forms is very difficult, not only for cabinet officers
but sub-cabinet and people within the White House and other
offices that make up this federal government. We've got to
make it easier to get people to want these jobs.
That's one of the difficult things. So I would hope
that when we go through the confirmation process with these
cabinet officers, we are thorough but we want to be
fair. I think we need to do that. We have
to make people want these jobs. What has developed over
the last twenty years in Washington is we're having trouble
getting people to take these jobs because of the brutality
of the process itself. And so I would hope we
can join together as Democrats and Republicans to make the
process more civil. Senator Reid, Senator Nickles, thank you both
for joining us. Still to come on the NewsHour tonight,
the Ashcroft controversy, and the Palestinian right of return debate.
Now, more on that brewing conflict over the nominee for
Attorney General. On the day he was nominated for Attorney
General, John Ashcroft said his only intent is to uphold
the law. Quite simply, we will strive to be a
guardian of liberty and equal justice. For freedom, as President-elect
Bush has noted, can flourish only in a culture defined
by the rule of law, a rule of law that
knows no class, that sees no color and bows to
no creed. Ashcroft became available for the justice job in
a highly unusual manner. He was defeated for reelection to
the Senate by the late Missouri Governor Mel Carnahan, who
was killed in a plane crash during the campaign. Carnahan's
widow, Jean, was appointed to take his place. Missouri is
a compassionate state, and I think in a very special
way they have demonstrated the compassion which they have. And
I hope that the outcome of this election is a
matter of comfort to Mrs. Carnahan. Ashcroft, 58, served two
terms as Governor of Missouri and one term in the
Senate. Last year, he contemplated--and then decided against--running
for President. Two lightning rod issues have clouded Ashcroft's nomination:
Abortion and race. Ashcroft opposes all abortion, including exceptions for
rape and incest. And he has argued that Ronnie White,
a Missouri Supreme Court Justice nominated by President Clinton to
the federal bench, is soft on crime. Today, the President-elect
defended his nominee. You've taken great pains to diversify your
cabinet, but are you concerned that with the nomination of
Senator Ashcroft and specifically the battle that is brewing coming
from civil rights groups and others--that that will undercut
that accomplishment in any way? First of all, David, I
would hope that all our nominations sail through, but that's
not generally the way it goes. I am sure there
is going to be some tough questioning for some of
our nominees. But they're all fully prepared to handle the
tough questioning. And I hope people do talk to John
Ashcroft about his vision of civil rights and his concept
of fairness in America--because I certainly did. I want
to remind you all that this is a man who
became the Attorney General of the state of Missouri--was
elected as the governor of the state of Missouri--and
a United States Senator in the state of Missouri; a
man who had a record of taking his heart and
philosophy to the people of a swing state and got
elected. And I'm confident that he’ll withstand the scrutiny about
his fairness and his heart. Unfortunately, sometimes politics enters into
the confirmation process. I understand that and so does he,
but I'm confident that when it is all said and
done Senator Ashcroft will be confirmed by the Senate. As
the debate over the Ashcroft nomination heats up, we turn
to four of the combatants. Kate Michelman is the President
of NARAL, the National Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action League,
Elaine Jones is the director of the NAACP Legal Defense
Fund, Clint Bolick is the litigation director at the Institute
for Justice, and Ken Conner is President of the Family
Research Council. Elaine Jones, from a legal point of view
looking at John Ashcroft as potential for being the nation’s
top lawyer, what is wrong or right with this nomination?
You know, Gwen, I wish I did not have to
be here opposing this nomination; but when you look at
John Ashcroft and his views overall, what you get is
a sense of a throwback to the fifties in terms
of our civil rights laws. They didn't exist. In the
last 35 years as a nation, we have gone through
fits and starts, up and down, creating this scheme of
civil rights protections for all of us, and now in
comes John Ashcroft opposing hate crimes, you know, looking...Very
differently looking at the whole question of employment discrimination--looking
at the whole issue of representation on the bench, on
a diverse federal bench. I mean, and so it just
gives you a real sense that we are in some
very serious jeopardy of holding on to that fabric that
we as a nation have fought to establish. Clint Bolick,
Elaine Jones speaks in apocalyptic terms about this nomination. In
extreme and excessive terms. John Ashcroft is a man who
believes to the core of his soul in the civil
rights laws of this country. He signed the first hate
crimes legislation in Missouri history. He voted for 26 out
of 28 minority appointments of President Clinton to the Bench.
The two he voted against--one, Ronnie White, was opposed
by 55 members of the United States Senate, including such
moderates as Jim Jeffords and Arlen Specter. The other was
withdrawn by President Clinton. He signed into law the Martin
Luther King Birthday holiday in Missouri, which was contentious elsewhere.
This is a man who will restore integrity to the
Justice Department, which desperately needs that integrity. What Elaine Jones
doesn't like is that times have changed and that a
majority of Americans think that the era of racial division
ought to be over; so too does John Ashcroft. Ken
Conner, the other big issue, of course, is abortion. As
you know, of course, John Ashcroft is very much anti-abortion.
Is this something that you...is it a relief to
see him nominated from your point of view? For those
of us who cherish life and believe that it's immoral
and legally wrong to extinguish the lives of innocent children,
we are heartened by the nomination of Senator Ashcroft. He
is a man committed to the rule of law. I
expect that he will enforce the law and bring much
needed confidence back to the Justice Department which has been
grossly over-politicized during the Clinton administration. He's a person of
good will, which is not to be confused with a
lack of will. And I think it's very heartening to
people around the country who cherish life that a person
such as Senator Ashcroft, a distinguished lawyer, a distinguished statesman,
has been nominated for this position. When you say rule
of law, does that also extend in your opinion to
upholding Roe versus Wade? I think it extends to upholding
the laws that are on the books. I think it
extends to affirming the decisions that are in place, recognizing
that many of us believe that in Roe versus Wade
the Supreme Court of the United States hijacked the Constitution
and wrote law, made law from the bench rather than
followed the law. We would certainly hope that Senator Ashcroft,
in his new position, would recommend judges who would be
committed to interpreting the law and who would leave lawmaking
to the lawmakers. Kate Michelman, is John Ashcroft a threat
to abortion rights? No question. President-elect Bush couldn't have chosen
anyone, not anyone, more hostile to a woman's right to
choose than John Ashcroft. He has spent his entire public
career as Governor, as Attorney General, as Senator assaulting a
woman's right to choose, trying to undo Roe versus Wade.
I've heard a lot of discussion about his qualifications and
upholding the rule of law. Roe versus Wade recognized a
woman's constitutional right to privacy and reproductive freedom and choice.
Roe versus Wade stands as a monument to women's equality.
In fact, Justice Blackman, who wrote Roe, said over and
over again Roe was necessary as women continued their long
journey to full emancipation. It was right in 1973 and
it's right in 1994 when he said that and it's
right in 2001. John Ashcroft has done everything in his
power, in all of his public offices to take that
right away. In fact, he supports legislation that would define
life beginning at fertilization, which would not only criminalize all
abortions, take away a woman's right to reproductive freedom and
choice but would also outlaw and criminalize many forms of
the most common birth control options. This is a serious
opponent of women's constitutional and fundamental rights of choice. Yes,
he's qualified. He's qualified as the leader of those who
want to dismantle Roe versus Wade and take women back
to a day when they had no control over their
lives and, in fact, when their lives and health were
endangered. Clint Bolick--I think it might be important to
remember that the Dred Scott decision was once the law
of the land. Plessy versus Ferguson was once the law
of the land, but that didn't mean the law wasn't
capable of evolution to come up with a better sense
of what was fair and just. I believe you can
expect Senator Ashcroft to enforce the rule of law and
to work through the appropriate processes to encourage a change
in the law to yield a fair and just result
for innocent unborn children. What we're being told clearly is
that you're talking about activists. What we are going to
have from an Attorney General-elect Ashcroft is a wholesale assault
on existing civil rights principles. That is as clear as
a bell. Now, Senator Ashcroft is reported to have said--
and I don't know whether I have to double check
this--he's reported to have said at one time--I
don't know whether he was in jest or not--that
saying the only things in the middle of the road
are a moderate and a dead skunk. I said, well,
there's something else in the middle road. And something else
in the middle of the road is a white line
down the middle of the road. And the people of
the United States expect the Attorney General to be right
there on that line. Just one moment. Clint Bolick just
said, he talked about the fact that Ronnie White had
been opposed by many people--Ronnie White, the African-American jurist
in Missouri. What's your response to that? I did not
raise the issue of the federal judicial appointments. That is
a frightening thing when you look at the whole question
of the Attorney General of the United States and the
Department of Justice as a gatekeeper to the federal bench.
That's what it is. It's where judges come in for
their questioning. It's where the selection begins. Ronnie White was
the first African-American jurist on the Supreme Court of Missouri,
well regarded, well respected. The Senate Judiciary Committee voted him
out overwhelmingly. And 17 months later here comes Senator Ashcroft
ambushing the man arguing that the man was soft on
crime and pro death penalty when the facts are that
of the 59 death penalty cases that this Judge Ronnie
White had, 41 of them he affirmed. I mean it
was an ambush. And Clint talks about the 55 Senators.
Senator Ashcroft went to the Republican caucus and for his
own political partisan purposes he persuaded the Republican caucus to
vote against Ronnie White on purely a partisan political...Elaine
just said something that I really love about John Ashcroft,
and that makes him almost unique here in Washington and
that is he is a guy who fights for what
he believes in. When John Ashcroft gives you his word,
he is going to keep his word. I think that's
the sort of thing that we need more of in
Washington and certainly need in an Attorney General. But what
Elaine just does not like is that the law of
the land is not where she wants it to be.
The law of the land is that racial discrimination is
wrong, regardless of whether it's called benign or...What was
racially discriminatory in the Ronnie White selection? There was nothing
discriminatory in that selection. John Ashcroft as Governor appointed the
first African-American Judge to the Western District Court of Appeals.
As I said he voted for the vast majority of
minority nominees. This is race-baiting pure and simple. It is
an effort on the part of the left wing and
the Democratic Party to inflame the base by injecting race.
Ashcroft opposed a lot of nominees because he disagreed with
them fundamentally on their view of the law not because
of their race. Ken Conner, among the other things John
Ashcroft opposed as Senator was his notion of buffer zones
around abortion clinics or at least a buffer zone which
would allow protesters to have to maintain a certain amount
of distance. Do you imagine as Attorney General he would
be able to affect that, would be able to repeal
that, would have some effect? Would you want him to?
I expect that he would enforce the existing law, and
we would hope that he would work to change the
existing law. Certainly, I think there are many, many people
around the country, many First Amendment scholars included, who believe
that the buffer zone requirements represent an abridgement of free
speech. And so I expect in Senator Ashcroft that you'll
find a man who committed to the rule of law
will work to enforce the existing law and at the
same time where the administration disagrees with the law as
it currently exists to follow the proper processes to build
the public and legislative consensus to pass laws that more
nearly equate with what's fair and just. How much pressure
are you prepared to put on the Justice Department to
change those laws? Well, we certainly intend to lobby the
administration and the Congress, the administrative agencies, to change laws
that we think are unfair and unjust. We believe it
to be wrong that innocent children are killed in this
country to the tune of about 1,400,000 every year. We
think that's a grave wrong in this country. And we
look forward to judges who will interpret the law, who
will interpret the Constitution, and not use the bench as
a vehicle for advancing their own political or personal or
philosophical agendas. We believe that judges who strictly construe the
Constitution in accordance with the intent of the Founders will
do away ultimately in the final analysis with this law
called Roe versus Wade, which has resulted in extermination of
42 million children since it was first passed by the
Supreme Court of the United States. Kate Michelman, are you
gearing up for a big fight on this? Absolutely. The
future of a woman's right to choose, the future of
a woman's equality is on the line here. President-elect Bush,
I must admit I was a bit startled by the
nomination in this respect. He campaigned hard to convince people
who were pro-choice, especially pro-choice women, that he was moderate
on these issues. And in one bold, dramatic fell swoop
he sort of cracked his facade and showed his intent
to do away with a woman's right to choose by
putting in place one of the most hostile to women's
rights, people he could find to lead the Justice Department.
I want to go back to something Elaine said. This
Attorney General role has a prominent position in the cabinet
as a whole. It is influential in domestic policy as
a whole--vets the Supreme Court Justice nominations, other federal
nominations; advises the President on federal legislation, advises the President
in numerous ways. This nomination poses an enormous threat to
rights that women took a century to gain. And I
think it's a harbinger of things to come in terms
of the kinds of appointments that George Bush is going
to make to satisfy those hardliners who helped him get
elected, helped bring votes to him. And I might add
that the President-elect has no mandate to take away a
woman's right to choose. People who voted...more people voted
for a pro-choice candidate than for an anti-choice candidate. So
with this nomination I think the President has laid the
gauntlet down. I think that John Ashcroft can be counted
on to not necessarily enforce the law but to try
to undo the law that protects a woman's fundamental right
to choose. Elaine Jones. And Clint Bolick just made the
point that John Ashcroft believes in the point and will
drive it home. I say yes to the point of
inflexibility. He has a belief. But it's a Republican President
that is making Republican appointments. Yes. Yes. What can you
do to stop that? And a Republican President has every
right to make a conservative appointment. A Democratic President can
make a conservative appointment. That is why I am saying
that John Ashcroft is outside of that mold. He is
much too far, he's not in the middle of the
road. He's not a little bit over to the right.
He defines on this issue one who has made up
his mind on, you know, there's a right way to
go on these issues and all of our laws that
we have carefully put together for the past 35 years
can be up for grabs. A response, Clint Bolick. My
My fondest hope is that you will spend a tremendous
amount of capital and energy on this because at the
end of the day John Ashcroft will be confirmed. There's
no surprise that Governor Bush has chosen John Ashcroft as
his Attorney General. Governor Bush was a law-and-order Governor in
Texas. He believes in the rule of law, so too
does John Ashcroft. I said that he keeps his promises.
The most sacred promise that he will make is his
oath to uphold the law of the land, when he's
sworn in as Attorney General. Unlike the last eight years
I think we'll have an Attorney General who will actually
do that. As Clint does, I say the U.S. Senate
will hear us and they will vote on the basis
of what they hear. Well, as Ray Suarez says, I
can tell that the fax machines are heating up. Thank
you all very much. A second look now at a
story we aired after last summer's Middle East peace negotiations
at Camp David. In August, Elizabeth Farnsworth traveled to Israel,
the West Bank and Gaza to look at some of
the key issues. Here is her report on the debate
over the right of return for Palestinian refugees, an increasingly
contentious negotiating point in the latest Middle East peace talks.
These are the faces of Palestinian refugees whose fate is
at stake in peace negotiations underway now. Rasslan Sukkar fled
Jaffa in what is now Israel in 1948 when he
was twelve years old. His wife left Jaffa as a
child too. They, their children, and grandchildren--three generations--have
lived most of their lives in a refugee camp in
Gaza. They live in this house in the "Beach Camp,"
as it is known. It is a small city now,
with more than 75,000 people. The United Nations has helped
refugees construct houses here, building up, not out, because of
limited space. This is one of the most densely populated
areas on earth--and one of the poorest. The annual
per capita income here is $800. 34 Sukkars live in
this three-story house. They all say the main thing they
want from peace negotiations is simply to go back home
to Jaffa. And that is a desire Israeli negotiators have
opposed. The places refugees like the Sukkars consider home, are
mostly inhabited by Jewish Israelis now, many of them refugees
from Europe and the Middle East. Yuli Tamir is a
member of the cabinet of Prime Minister Ehud Barak: Can
you imagine now a Jewish move back to Europe, saying
to people in Poland, or in Germany or in Czechoslovakia,
go back, leave your houses--these were our houses? In
Gaza, the Sukkar family gathered to explain their desire to
go home. We are determined...if it's not us, it's
the sons of our sons--one day they can go
back. Rasslan Sukkar's father was a manager of stevedores at
the Jaffa Harbor until 1948 when the family fled the
chaos of the war that followed the declaration of the
Jewish State in Palestine. In 1948 because of the war,
we had to leave there to emigrate through Egypt; and
after two years there we had to come to live
in Gaza. The UN was the only organization helping; otherwise
a lot of people would have been dead by now.
I remember when I left Jaffa I was seven years
old. My father was always telling us tomorrow, next month,
next year, and until now look what happened to us...
we didn't go nowhere. You still have your key? I
remember my aunt at that time, my husband's mother, when
we were leaving, she locked the door and put it
around her neck. When I look at this key, I
say where am I from? Fifty years I'm waiting to
go back to my Palestinian soil in Jaffa. Jaffa, which
is just south of Tel Aviv, lies tantalizingly close to
the Sukkars' Gaza home--a 40 mile drive up the
Mediterranean coast. The family has returned to Jaffa occasionally, but
they need a special permit from the Israelis to cross
the border, and it is often refused. Standing here next
to the ancient port of Jaffa, it's easy to understand
why refugees like the Sukkars want so intensely to return.
They remember this beautiful light, the graceful homes, the fragrance
of orchards that used to surround the city. Even Palestinians
who didn't flee, who are still here, remember the old
times with longing. One of those Palestinians is Fakhri Geday,
a pharmacist who is writing a history of the Arab
community here. On a tour, Geday described what Jaffa was
like before the 1948 fighting drove people like the Sukkars
out. The city was mainly Arab, he said, but with
many Jews. Of more than 65,000 Arabs in 1948; all
but a few thousand fled. Jaffa is part of Tel
Aviv now and is mostly Jewish-Israeli. Geday said 75 percent
of the old Arab buildings in Jaffa, including the Sukkars'
home, have been destroyed. Those that remain are much in
demand now, and some are being restored. This building used
to be an Arab building. It was bought by a
Jewish lawyer, who is my friend, Sewkawalski. And he repaired
it and is now renting it. Israeli artist Etti Barchil
has been a leader in the effort to protect the
old Arab homes. She and her husband restored this 150-year-old
house themselves. Her family fled anti-Jewish persecution in Iran in
1949. She has little sympathy for the Palestinian refugees' desire
to return. The truth is I cannot blame people who
fled out of fear, I cannot judge them, but the
fact is that a lot of people stayed. Over a
million people in Israel today are Palestinian Arabs who chose
to stay. I have no problem with that. But we
were forced to flee, and that's important to emphasize. We've
got a small piece of land, damn it! Let us
live! Gaby Aldor also lives in a restored Arab home.
She bought it from the Israeli Housing Authority, which took
over abandoned Arab properties after 1948. Some of Aldor's family
came from Europe in the early 20th century, some later,
fleeing the Holocaust. She's a choreographer/director who has produced a
much-awarded theater piece about the overlapping claims in this city.
How do you justify living in a home that, that
perhaps belongs to somebody else? Well, it's the same as
I can't justify or not justify the fact that somebody's
living in my father's house in Vienna. I mean this
is really the tragedy of history. In this century people
have been moved, people move. So what I can do
is recognize their pain and say yes, it is painful...
you can't really emotionally say "Okay, the Palestinians, there was
something wrong done to them..." because you can't cut it
off from the history of the whole era; and the
whole era's history is awful. In Aldor's play, the protagonist,
like the Sukkars, long to go home. In my play,
the guy has a key, but as a matter of
fact, no one can come back because there is no
way back. So I understand his longing. But my father
was longing, all his life, to Vienna. There is no
way back, ever. I'm, okay, I say "You're welcome. Come
here." Where do I go? Vienna? I'm not wanted there.
Gaby Aldor said this issue is especially sensitive because Israelis
in Jaffa and elsewhere worry a Palestinian Right of Return
threatens Israel's existence as a Jewish State. Cabinet member Tamir
explained. For us, the main motivation for the peace process,
apart from living in peace with our neighbors, is that
we would like to have a state which is a
Jewish state, that has mainly a Jewish majority. And at
the moment I don't think that the Middle East is
ripe for some sort of mingling of populations and if
the refugees will come back to the territory of Israel,
Israel will turn into a binational state. Well, see that's
part of the process of negotiations where you try to
intimidate the other side by making justice so catastrophic to
your side that it is unthinkable. Salim Tamari is a
Palestinian sociologist who has been closely involved in negotiations on
the refugee issue. He has pushed for the Right of
Return as an essential component of a just peace. His
old home in Jaffa has become a drug rehabilitation center.
He would like it returned to his family, at least
in principal; but says they probably wouldn't go back. The
Right of Return does not mean the practice of the
right of return by four and a half million refugees.
It means the refugees have the principle right to return
as a choice and then the modalities of return will
have to be negotiated with the Israelis. In this respect
I think the same advice I'm giving the Palestinians, I'm
giving also to our own people: you cannot turn the
historical wheel backwards, and if you do it, it will
just cause disaster. Imagine if all the Jewish refugees that
came here from the Arab world would now say, "Okay,
we want to go back to Morocco or Tunisia or
Algeria or to Syria, or to Egypt. I think this
will destabilize the area to an enormous extent. While experts
and negotiators debate, researchers at the "Orient House," the headquarters
of the Palestinian leadership in East Jerusalem, are working to
document Arab holdings confiscated by Israelis since 1948. Using records
going back to the Ottoman Empire and the years when
the British ruled, geographers are painstakingly identifying ownership of Arab
homes and lands then and now. In the past, Palestinian
negotiators had resisted discussing compensation; but it is very much
on the table now, Tamari says. Compensation is being considered
now as part of a package which includes the right
of return, repatriation, resettlement and restitution. Now compensation is acceptable
only within this context because it will have to include,
for example, notions of restitution, which means people who had
property, at least some of them, will be able to
claim their property back. The Israelis have their own proposals
too...First of all, Israel insists it will not recognize
the right of return to the sovereign territory of the
state of Israel; however, we are trying to put together
a package deal that will alleviate the pain and suffering
of the Palestinian refugees. We will also take into account
that Israel itself has absorbed many Jewish refugees from the
Arab world, from all around the world, and we'll try
to work for the benefit of those individuals. Specifically, there
was talk at Camp David about setting up an international
consortium which would administer a multibillion dollar fund to provide
compensation to Palestinians refugees and perhaps to Jewish refugees from
Arab countries too. The money would come from the United
States, Europe and other countries. No one can say at
this point what a peace agreement might mean for the
Sukkar family in Gaza. They have heard they may be
offered compensation instead of the right of return, but they
know nothing is definite. They want to give compensation, look,
I mean, to give me back my land is cheaper
for them than to give me money; I want my
land. You know, to give me compensation my suffering--my
suffering is in my heart; it will not go away.
Since that report was prepared, renewed violence in Gaza, the
West Bank and in Israel has cost more than 300
lives, mostly Palestinian. Again, the major stories of this Tuesday,
President-elect Bush rounded out his cabinet with nominees for transportation,
labor and energy. And Palestinian leader Arafat met with President
Clinton at the White House. They discussed the latest U.S.
proposals for a Middle East peace settlement. We'll see you
online, and again here tomorrow evening. I'm Gwen Ifill, thank
you and good night.
