content
Good evening. I'm Jim Lehrer. On the NewsHour tonight, the
Bosnia mission, Elizabeth Farnsworth interviews Senator McCain, then come excerpts
from Congressional hearings and a discussion of why it takes
the United States to make and keep peace. New information
on breast cancer. Charlayne Hunter-Gault talks to Dr. Christine Byrd.
And the information highway future, David Gergen has a dialogue
with Bill Gates. It all follows our summary of the
news this Thursday. Senate Republicans began closing ranks today behind
the sending of U.S. troops to Bosnia. Majority Leader Bob
Dole said on the Senate floor he would reluctantly support
the President. I just hope we can all work together
in the coming days to fashion a resolution which supports
our military forces, reduces the risks they face, and brings
them home as soon as possible. Now some would say,
well, if you do this, you're supporting the President of
the United States. I'd say, oh, that's all right with
me. We have one President at a time. He is
the commander in chief. He's made the decision. I don't
agree with it. I think it's a mistake. We had
a better option, many better options. As I said, he
repeatedly rejected those options. Right after this News Summary, we'll
have a Newsmaker interview with Senator John McCain, the Arizona
Republican who spoke with Senator Dole on the Senate floor
today. On the House side today, two key committees heard
the official pitch for sending U.S. troops to Bosnia. It
came from top administration officials, including Secretary of State Christopher,
Defense Secretary Perry, and Joint Chiefs Chairman Shalikashvili. We'll have
excerpts from their testimony, plus more Bosnia coverage following the
McCain Newsmaker. Republican and Democratic budget negotiators cancelled their talks
for the next two days. They said they were deadlocked
in their attempt to agree on a seven-year plan to
balance the budget. Kwame Holman reports. This afternoon, congressional Republicans
unveiled the final version of their seven-year balanced budget, and
sent it to the White House for the President's consideration,
but House Speaker Newt Gingrich acknowledged the reception the plan
is likely to get when the President returns to Washington.
You know, obviously, the odds against his signing this are
pretty steep. Gingrich also complained the White House is not
negotiating in good faith toward a compromise on a seven-year
balanced budget. The White House will not admit how much
more spending they want or how much higher the taxes
are they want compared to our plans. That complaint was
echoed by Republican negotiators late this afternoon, following a two-hour
budget session with the Democrats. We have a right to
know what their budget looks like. They don't want to
tell us. It's very hard to negotiate when you don't
know what you're negotiating. But White House Chief of Staff
Leon Panetta emerged from the meeting blaming the Republicans. We
have constantly said we have got to protect Medicare, we
have got to protect Medicaid, education, the environment. We're not
going to raise taxes on working families. Let's talk through
those issues. We thought that was agreed to. Unfortunately, that's
not what happened today. I hope that after a good
night's sleep that the Republicans will be ready to get
to work and try to see if we can resolve
our differences. The two sides have agreed on one thing,
to take a break from negotiations and not meet again
until Monday. The Senate Whitewater Committee decided today to ask
First Lady Hillary Clinton to answer four questions in writing
under oath. Committee members want to know about a phone
call she might have made the day of the Vincent
Foster suicide. The call was made to a Washington number
from the Little Rock residence where Mrs. Clinton was staying.
Investigators have been unable to determine who was called, or
who did the calling. Four questions as they relate to
the telephone number 202-628-7087 which will be sent to the
White House to Mrs. Clinton to ask if she can
identify the number or the person. Basically, we'll, after we
make some typographical and grammar corrections, we'll have it available.
Pardon. Oh, we have a corrected copy. Well, let's have
it verified and, and we will ask that this interrogatory
be undertaken by Mrs. Clinton. Mr. Chairman, I appreciate we
had the opportunity to consult. This is--it's obviously an
unusual and unprecedented action, to send interrogatories to the First
Lady, and this is an unusual situation, this particular one.
We made every effort to obtain information from the sources,
the telephone company and so forth, and we have not
been able to get full information. So I think the
interrogatories in this instance are appropriate. House Speaker Gingrich attacked
the Federal Election Commission today. He denied an FEC charge
yesterday that a Republican Political Action Committee called GOPAC violated
election laws. The FEC said GOPAC, then headed by Gingrich,
gave $250,000 to his reelection campaign in 1990. Until '91,
GOPAC was limited by law to spending money on state
and local candidates. Gingrich responded to reporters' questions this morning.
Did GOPAC ever contribute to your 1990 campaign? No, it
did not in any way. Not at all? And the
FEC filings are false and malicious. There's an old rule.
If you have the facts, pound the facts. If you
have the law, pound the law. If you don't have
the facts or the law, pound the table. The FEC
is pounding the table. It's a false and malicious charge.
Bill Clinton became the first American President to visit Northern
Ireland today. Hundreds of well-wishers turned out to greet him
and Mrs. Clinton as they arrived in Belfast. They visited
both Catholic and Protestant neighborhoods, shaking hands with people in
the crowd. At the Mackie Engineering plant, the President was
introduced by two children of plant workers. My first daddy
died in the troubles. It was the saddest day of
my life. I still think of him. Now it is
nice and peaceful. I like having peace and quiet for
a change, instead of people shooting and killing. My Christmas
wish is that peace and love will last in Ireland
forever. Please have a safe journey back to America. I
hope you enjoyed your visit to Ireland. And now, ladies
and gentlemen, we would like to introduce the President of
the United States. This is one of those occasions where
I really feel that all that needs to be said
has already been said. For 25 years now, the history
of Northern Ireland has been written in the blood of
its children and their parents. The ceasefire turned the page
on that history. It must not be allowed to turn
back. Later, the Clintons traveled to Londonderry. Thousands were on
hand for the President's speech in the streets of the
300-year-old city. They waved British, Irish, and American flags. President
Clinton told them to work together for peace. The Clintons
returned to Belfast later in the day, where the President
lit a Christmas tree donated by the city of Nashville,
Tennessee. Fifty thousand people attended the ceremony in the square
in front of City Hall. Mr. and Mrs. Clinton will
travel to the Irish capital of Dublin tomorrow. Lumpectomies are
effective in treating early-stage breast cancer. That conclusion from the
National Cancer Institute was published today in the "New England
Journal of Medicine." The report was prompted by questions that
had arisen about the reliability of a 1985 landmark study
of lumpectomies. We'll have more on this story later in
the program. Three days of rain have triggered heavy flooding
in the Pacific Northwest. Every major river in Western Washington
State has flooded, forcing hundreds to evacuate. Gov. Lowry declared
a state of emergency in 14 counties. And in Northwestern
Oregon, mudslides have closed sections of Highway 101 and flood
warnings are issued near four rivers. A volcano in Nicaragua
called Cerro Negro erupted today. It exploded in Leon, northwest
of the capital of Managua. Sand and lava covered fields,
blocked roads, and contaminated wells. No injuries were reported, but
thousands of people have been forced to flee their homes.
And that's it for the News Summary tonight. Now it's
on to Senator McCain, Bosnia hearings, the U.S. as the
world's peacemakers and keepers, new word on breast cancer treatment,
and Gergen and Gates. The Bosnia mission again leads the
program tonight. Our continuing coverage begins with an important development
on the Senate floor today. Elizabeth Farnsworth has that story.
Senate Majority Leader Robert Dole took the floor late this
afternoon along with a bipartisan group of colleagues. They said
they were working on a resolution that would support the
administration's troop deployment in Bosnia and try to define its
limits. One of the Senators joining Dole was Republican John
McCain of Arizona, who had previously raised numerous questions about
the deployment. He joins us now from the Senate. Thank
you for being with us, Senator McCain. Thank you, Elizabeth.
What has led you to move towards supporting the President
in the deployment of troops in Bosnia, albeit with reservations?
Elizabeth, I don't support the deployment of the troops. I've
accepted the fact that the troops are going. There is
nothing the Congress of the United States can do in
reality to stop the deployment. We could pass a block
cutting off funds. The President's veto of that could clearly
be sustained. So we are faced with the situation where
very shortly 20,000 Americans are going to be in Bosnia.
It seems to me that then if that is the
case, and it clearly is, that we should then do
whatever we can to make sure that that deployment is
successful, that they are back in a year, and that
when they leave, there is an opportunity for a lasting
peace, and could I add one more point? Now that
the President of the United States has committed these troops
for us to, if we could, say that isn't going
to happen, then I think it could have negative consequences
on our credibility as a nation, on the NATO alliance,
and, of course, in the view of the three parties
that signed the agreement in Dayton, it could reignite the
conflict in Bosnia. So I guess what I'm saying is
I'm playing the hand that we're dealt. What conditions do
you and your colleagues hope to get in to a
resolution of, of into the authorization resolution? Well, Senator Dole
and I have consulted with people like Jean Kirkpatrick, Richard
Perle, Brent Scowcroft, Paul Wolfowitz, Zbig Brzezinski and others, and
basically what we've sought is fundamentally two things. One is
that our American military will be confined to purely military
mission, this business of resettling refugees or nation building, or
repeating the mistakes we made in places like Somalia that
we just do not believe that that is a reasonable
role, and we want it, their role to be confined
to pure military activities. So second and probably far more
important is that we believe that if there's going to
be a lasting peace or, in the words of one
of our witnesses before the Armed Services Committee, a lasting
ceasefire, that there must be a battlefield of stability and
parity, and as far as the military capabilities of the
Bosnians are concerned. And we want the Bosnians trained, armed,
and equipped, and capable of defending themselves when we leave.
How about a clear exit strategy, is that something you'll
be working on too? Yes, Elizabeth, but the most important
part of the exit strategy would be a stable military
situation in the region, so that fighting wouldn't start right
away. We would envision the United States being there for
a year, everything remaining quiet. If the Bosnians are very
weak, then of course they might fall prey to an
attack by the Serbs or even the Croats at some
point in the not-too-distant future after the United States troops
leave. Senator, you said no non-military activities. As you understand
the annexes to the peace agreement, are there non-military activities
called for? Well, there's a great deal of ambivalence about
that, Elizabeth. The agreement, itself, calls, as you know, for
resettlement of refugees, for elections, for all kinds of civilian
or civil kinds of activities. And we don't object to
any of that, although I think it's very unrealistic, to
be honest. But we don't object to that. We just
don't--we just want to make absolutely sure that American
military personnel are not engaged in those kinds of activities.
In your statement on the Senate floor today, you urged
your Republican colleagues to consider very carefully the institution of
the presidency as they make this decision. Could you elaborate
on that? I absolutely will, Elizabeth, and I think this
is a fundamental and important point. Thomas Jefferson sent the
United States Navy, without the permission of Congress, to wipe
out the Barbary Pirates. President Reagan sent Americans to invade
Grenada. President Bush invaded Panama, et cetera. And as you
know, President Bush made it very clear that if he
did not receive authorization from Congress, he was still going
into the Persian Gulf. He believed he had that constitutional
authority, and by the way, I believe he does too.
So I want us to consider this issue and the
President's authority to commit American troops in a nonpartisan fashion
and to treat it exactly the same as if it
were a Republican President as it is with a Democrat
President. Otherwise, I think in the long run, we could
show disrespect to the very document under which we function.
You also said in your statement that you recognize that
you will bear some of the responsibility in the event
that something goes wrong. Do you think this is important
for our government, that Congress also is bearing the responsibility?
I do. And that's why I think the proposals I've
heard that one of the--maybe the House would just
say we don't vote at all, or a straight vote
of disapproval, which would not be--have to be adhered
to, those things, I think, might make us feel good,
but I do believe that if we accept, as I
said at the beginning of our conversation, that the troops
are going, then it is our obligation to minimize the
loss of life and do whatever we can in our
best judgment to ensure that the mission is most successful.
It seems to me that we abrogate our responsibilities if
we don't actively engage in that effort. Have you spoken
about this with Senator Gramm, whose campaign for the presidency,
you, I think you're the national chairman of it, aren't
you, and who has come out--at least he has
spoken in opposition to the deployment of troops. Absolutely. And
I oppose the deployment as well. I don't think he
agrees with this, this authorization proposal that we're working on,
but Senator Gramm and I have disagreed in the past,
for example, on the issue of normalization of relations with
Vietnam. But we--I'll remain his supporter and I will
remain in close consultation with him on this issue. Senator
McCain, you come to this with a very unique vantage
point, having been a POW in Vietnam for so many
years. I would imagine this has been difficult for you,
thinking this through, and then deciding to do what you're
doing now. Elizabeth, could I say, first of all, I
try to put that behind me and try to do
what I think is in the best interest of the
country. And I'll tell you candidly these phone calls and
sentiment in my state are overwhelmingly against supporting this deployment.
I don't support it, but I do believe that my
obligation is not to take a hike on issues like
these, but it is to try to do what's best.
If one young American dies because we didn't do everything
we could to make this very risky expedition as safe
as possible, then I don't think we have a clear
conscience. And I also feel that we are judged by
history, not by the daily polls. Thank you for being
with us, Senator. Thank you, Elizabeth. Elsewhere on the capital
today, the administration went about the job of selling the
Bosnia mission. Margaret Warner reports on that. Three top Clinton
administration officials came before the House International Affairs Committee today
to outline the proposed U.S. mission in Bosnia. It was
the first time that administration officials had laid out the
specifics of the Bosnia military operation to Congress since President
Clinton announced his intention to have U.S. troops participate in
a NATO peace enforcement operation. Secretary of State Warren Christopher
began by arguing that American ground troops offer the only
viable option for sustaining a peace in Bosnia. We have
a fundamental choice in this situation. As the President made
clear, if the United States does not participate, there will
be no NATO force. And if there's no NATO force,
there will be no peace in Bosnia, and the war
will reignite. We know what would happen. There would be
more massacres, more concentration camps, more hunger, a real threat
of a wider war, and immense danger to our leadership
in NATO, in Europe, and the world as a whole.
Those are the alternatives that we absolutely must avoid. Defense
Secretary William Perry came armed with elaborate charts detailing the
specifics of the operation. The troops would number 32,000, he
said, 20,000 in Bosnia, itself, another 5,000 in Croatia, and
7,000 in neighboring countries. The cost, Perry said, would be
about $2 billion. They start going in about mid-December, assuming
that the peace agreement is signed on the 14th of
December, which is the present plan. They will be going
in a day or so after that. General Shalikashvili can
describe to you in more detail the deployment plan. I
will simply say it will be a rapid deployment. Perry
insisted that all steps were being taken to minimize the
risk to the U.S. forces and to limit the scope
of their mission. We will not repeat the mistakes of
the UN force which is in Bosnia, which allowed itself
to get pushed around, which allowed itself to have its
freedom of movement curtailed. Our troops will be sufficient size,
sufficiently well armed, and sufficiently well trained and with sufficiently
strong rules of engagement that they will be able to
carry out this mission. Still, committee Republicans were skeptical. Gentlemen,
I have here about 140 letters that have come in
since the President's speech opposing the use of ground forces
by my constituents. I have two letters from my constituents
supporting it. What do I tell them when they say
we can't control the peace on our streets in Los
Angeles, New York, Chicago, across this country, with the murders
and killings going on, yet we can go to the
foreign soil and put our young men in harm's way
in a no-win situation? The President has said that we,
unfortunately, can expect casualties. From the studies you do in
the Pentagon on the different scenarios, could you give us
some idea of what kind of casualties we can expect,
because that's the greatest concern we have on this committee
and in the Congress. There are no models for casualty
in this kind of an operation. And anybody that represents
to you that the casualties will be such and such
is misrepresenting, I think, is extending his information farther than
the data will support. I want to ask you very
seriously, Mr. Secretary, because many of us were around at
the time of Vietnam, do you really, really, really, deep
down in your heart, feel this is doable? I don't
want to go through the McNamara experience again, where a
Secretary of Defense comes and says, I knew at the
very beginning it wasn't doable. It's an easy answer, because
it's the same as my official position. Yes, I believe
it's doable. If I did not believe it were doable,
I would not be representing that to you. I would
leave my job before I would come over and tell
the Congress something I didn't believe on an issue this
important. This afternoon, the three Clinton officials went before the
House National Security Committee, the committee with direct oversight over
the military. If the going got tough, committee Republicans wanted
to know, would the President maintain his resolve? And I
haven't seen in this administration the political backbone, if you
will, the moral authority, if you really believe that this
is a mission that has to be accomplished to stand
and continue to, to maintain a force in the face
of overwhelming negative public opinion. One thing I would say
is that this has to be a demonstration that the
President is not unduly motivated by polls, because, if he
were, he would not be recommending the deployment of American
forces. By, by all accounts, this action is, is not
popular, and yet, he's doing it because he believes it's
right. The administration's trio will be back on the Hill
tomorrow before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. Still to come
on the NewsHour tonight: Why is the United States the
peacemaker, a breast cancer development, and Gergen talks to Gates.
Now to a central point underlying the U.S. mission to
Bosnia; that there can be no peace agreements like the
one in Bosnia and no peace on the ground without
the direct involvement of the United States of America. We
explore that premise with three men who have written extensively
about the modern, as well as the ancient world: Ronald
Steel, a professor of international relations at the University of
Southern California, author of the Temptations of a Superpower; Donald
Kagan, professor of history at Yale University whose latest book
is on the origins of war; and John Lukacs, author
of many histories of modern Europe, a professor at Chestnut
Hill College in Philadelphia. Ronald Steel, how important a development
is this that only the United States can make and
keep peace in Bosnia? I think it's probably more accurate
to say that only the United States will intervene to
keep peace in Bosnia. If it's just a question of
20,000 men, clearly the Europeans have the capacity to do
that. But they don't have the will to do that.
And I think this is the crucial element that's missing.
They've tried to keep out of direct involvement in civil
war. They've wanted to help the refugees, help civilians, but
to stand aside while the combatants were fighting. They--they
were able to achieve this for a time, but the
war has continued. There's been a lot of pressure in
this country to do something about it to end it,
and now the, I think, the pressure for the United
States to intervene has been building for some time, and
the leadership, if you will, of the United States was,
I think, the crucial factor. The Europeans didn't want to
get locked out of this. They didn't want this to
be an American operation. The Americans did not want--the
American government did not want this to be simply a
European operation. So I see there's--there's two elements there,
I think. There's one that the United States wanted to
end this war, the government wanted to end this war.
I think for humanitarian reasons it's also voiced a security
argument, which I don't think is very compelling. I think
that's very confusing. I think it's muddying the waters here.
It's essentially a humanitarian argument there. And the second one
is that the United States wants to continue to play
a major role in NATO, and the--to make clear
to the Europeans that the United States is going to
remain a European power. Prof. Lukacs, how do you see
this? The question--the word "historic" is one that's thrown
around a lot. Is this a turning point of some
kind that the United States is now in this role
of the maker and the keeper of the peace? It’s
a small turning point. I thought for a long time
that it was a mistake for the United States to
get involved as much in what was the former Yugoslavia,
that the Europeans should have done it. But the Europeans
didn't do that. And now that this agreement or armistice
is cobbled together in Dayton, it's sort of extraordinary and
because of this, I think that given this armistice agreement,
the United States must sustain it. If the United States
now refuses to go along and implement it, it will
be a tremendous loss for American prestige with rather incalculable
consequences. In this respect, I'm very impressed--what I saw
Senator McCain say. I mean, he was very statesmanlike about
this. On the other hand, what is slightly historic about
this, that by and large, the prestige of this country
has been declining for the past few years. The very
fact that the United States now filled a vacuum means,
I hope, more than a temporary rise of the prestige
of this country. Professor Kagan, how do you read this,
this development? Well, I think one thing we need to
understand is what the real character of NATO is and
has been from the beginning. It's--I would describe it
in the way that we ancient historians use to describe
some ancient alliances. An alliance with a hegemon, that is
to say even though everybody is a voluntary member of
this organization, even though there are no formal distinctions among
them, from the first, it was understood that the
United States was the leader of this organization. So the
allies have always looked to the United States for leadership.
There's just no tradition, no history of the rest of
NATO acting independently. I think we have to accept the
fact that that's the kind of alliance that it is.
We shouldn't be surprised that Europeans were unwilling to act
independently but looked to us for leadership. And we need
to fill our part there, not merely because of the
humanitarian issues, which are of course very important, but it's
deeply in our interest to see that NATO continues to
function as a force for preserving peace. But beyond NATO,
Professor Kagan, before NATO--I mean, before Bosnia came Haiti,
came Somalia. All of those were also driven by the
United States. Is this the new world, wherever it is?
Well, I think the great question of where it's necessary
to intervene is always a difficult one, and will never
be able to be determined in advance. That's what we
need statesmen for, to make good judgments about particularities. But
on the larger question, my own opinion is that the
world was presented at the time of the collapse of
the Soviet Union, the end of the Cold War, with
a very rare opportunity for establishing a system that would
preserve peace over a period of time. We find that
there's only one great military superpower in the world, and
it turns out that that power is widely and rightly
understood not to have aggressive designs and not to be
interested in changing things in its own favor but really
having an interest in preserving the situation that exists. In
those circumstances, if that nation is willing to accept its
responsibilities, it can and, along with the people who feel
the same way, of which fortunately there are many, that
violence as a solution of international problems is not legitimate.
And I think Bosnia is about in a deeper way
precisely that point. Do you agree? No, I don't. I
think that first of all NATO is a historic fact,
it's an alliance that was designed to protect Europe from
Russian power during the Cold War. It was an alliance that
is today without an enemy, and what we're living in,
I think, is the kind of after-shadow of NATO, if
you will. We're living with the heritage of European pacivity
and dependency upon the United States, the fact that the
Europeans have not constituted themselves as an independent power in
any way and, therefore, are unable to take a lead
in an issue like this; however, I don't--I think
it's critical for us not to lose the distinction between
tranquility and security. The President has talked about our security
is deeply involved in Europe. Of course, it's involved in
Europe. It's historically been involved in not allowing Europe to
be dominated by a single power which will then be
able to do us great harm. That was why we
were in World War I. That was why we were
in World War II. But it's not about ensuring domestic
tranquility within every European border. This is--So what is
it about this? About NATO, what is NATO? No, no,
no. What is the--what does Bosnia say that the
United States is about? Forget the NATO part, just the
United States. What is it about now? I think the
United States has inherited a role as a leader of
a great alliance and it has become the only powerful
really super powerful country of the world, therefore, there are
tremendous demands made upon the United States by the participants
in this war to do something, by the Europeans to
do something. There's an expectancy to do something. There's also
this feeling among Americans that if we have the power
to do something, we should do something. What we're not
doing in this country is having any kind of debate
about what we ought to be doing, the distinction between
what we can do and what we should do. And
that's why I think that this is a historic moment.
I think that this is the first time that we've
engaged in what is quite likely to be a military
action which is quite divorced from military security. From our
own security? From our own security. Previously we said even
in places like Vietnam, Korea, that these were important for
global balance, Communists would benefit from it if we didn't
help these countries, and that, therefore, our own security was
directly involved because we are in this competition with the
Russians anymore or anybody else anymore. What is the meaning
of alliances? Why should the United States become, in effect,
the global peacekeeper? Now that is the role we can
play, but I think it's one we ought to debate.
Yeah. And that debate--has that debate begun, Professor Lukacs?
Is that what this is really going to lead to?
I mean, is that where we're in the middle of,
actually right now? I don't think so. I think that
the present debate within the country is a very short
range one. I think in the short run this is,
if I may say so, an interesting experiment. It sort
of reverses what's been going on in the past few
years. I hope it works. But allow me to attempt
a--Excuse me, if I can make sure I understand
what you mean, you hope the Bosnia experiment works, is
that what you mean? Yes. If it doesn't work, then
what happens to the long-- the long range is over?
Well, that I don't know, because I'm a historian, not
a prophet. Okay. But--Sorry about that. But I want
to say something to attempt at the risk of being
presumptuous of the longer view, this goes against what is
the long range development. The long range development that these
three big institutions--NATO, the United Nations, and the European
Community--are now 50 years old. They were the result
of the world situation after the Second World War. They
fulfilled a purpose, but they are all to some extent
antiquated, as you know, even NATO, NATO is the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization. What does the North Atlantic have to
do with Bosnia? I mean, of course, this goes back
to 1951, when Mr. Atchison included Greece and Turkey into
NATO, which I think was probably a geographical misnomer. The
United Nations is certainly not united. It's certainly not an
assembly of nations but simply a compendium of governments. The
European Community is not a community. It's an economic organization
with a very, very vague and unknown political future. We
have to think about that. You see, the United States
in a way is now, is an exception, the Bosnian
thing, withdrawing from Europe. We have fewer European bases; we
have fewer troops in Europe than we had five or
ten years ago. The entire movement of the United States,
the composition of the American population is moving westward, away
from Europe. It is a new age that's beginning. That
is the long range development. To some extent, this short
range development of Bosnia goes in the opposite direction. I
welcome it. I hope it works. What's going to happen
in the long run I do not know. Professor Kagan,
what do you see in terms of the United States
long range as a result of what this Bosnia--call
it an experiment--call it whatever you would like? Well,
it depends how it plays out. I see the--It
has to be successful or it will mean--The results
will be very bad news in a long range way,
if it's not successful. I think we have to make
up our minds that this is going to be successful.
The definition of success is going to be argued about,
of course. In my eyes, the critical element is that
we have to show that we are committed not to
allow war to be the way to settle these questions
and that we are prepared to use force to avoid
that in the--in the extreme situation, if we have
to. But I think Mr. Lukacs's observations are interesting and
valuable, and I would just make some distinctions about these
different organizations. The one that seems to me to have
hope and usefulness for the future if it is used
in that way, is NATO. It's perfectly correct and fine
to point out what its origins were and what its
technical orientation is and so on, but it needn't be
only what it was in the past. Of course, it
can't be, since it was chiefly aimed at the Soviet
Union, which doesn't exist. But it's clear that the participants
in NATO are reluctant to just let it fade away.
And they're right to be reluctant. What it presents is
a tool, if properly used, that could be a new
element in international relations, something we haven't seen in the
past that could be used to the general good, and
I think we need to try to make it that.
But, Ronald Steel, whether it's NATO, whether it's UN, any
of these organizations, are they all dependent on the will
of the United States for them to actually perform these
missions? Well, I think NATO and the way that it's
been constructed, it's clearly an alliance that all during the
Cold War has been dominated by the United States. We
were the leader of it, of course, and, therefore, if
NATO is to continue in anything like it's old form,
if the Europeans are continuing to remain rather passive and
concern themselves mostly with enrichment and the United States continues
to want to play this role of global leader, then
I suppose NATO is useful. Certainly one of the, I
think, reasons why the administration has been drawn into involvement
in the Bosnian war after being so reluctant for such
a long time is a concern about making NATO relevant,
of--You don't think it's a concern over making the
United States relevant? Well, but I think they're connected in
the sense that there's the belief that we don't want
the Europeans just left to their own devices; we want
to play a role in Europe, and, therefore, we want
to do something for the Europeans that they're not doing
for themselves. We protected them from the Russians all those
years, which they felt they couldn't do for themselves. When
they worked out a settlement in Bosnia among the contending
forces in 1992, we refused to back it, saying that
it wasn't good enough. People forget that, that there was
a peace agreement similar to the one that was negotiated--
Sure.--in Dayton by the Europeans. But we said, no,
that's ethnic cleansing; we don't like that, we're not going
to--we're not going to support it, but as a
result, the various factions said that they didn't think it
was going to last, and so they continued fighting all
these years. But I do think it's--it's critical for
us not to argue over constitutionality and what should be
the prerogative of the President, all the kinds of things
the Congress is concerned with these days in the name
of credibility. I think there's something very important at stake
here. And this is: Does the United States continue to
define its place in the world the way it did
during the Cold War? I think Professor Kagan states it
very well. I don't agree with him, but should the
United States be, in effect, the international peacekeeper? I'd like
to live in a world where grievances aren't settled by
war anymore either. I don't think we're anywhere near that
kind of world, and I don't think that the United
States has the power to bring about that kind of
world. I think it would bankrupt the United States. I
think it would divide the American people terribly, and it
would bring us all to grief; therefore, we have to
choose our involvements very carefully, and we have to say,
how is this related to the interests and the concerns
of the American people? Now, I think you can make
an argument for intervention in Bosnia, but I think it
has to be essentially on humanitarian grounds. It's not about
stability because Europe has been stable. All right. Could I
say a word about that? One quick word. Yes, sir.
I simply want to say that we mustn't imagine that
if we just back off from Europe and back off
from the rest of the world, everything is going to
be nifty. The assumption is you've got dangers and troubles
if you act, but none if you don't act. We
have made the point that there must be a debate,
and we started it tonight, and it will go on
and on and on. Thank you all three very much.
Now, a breast cancer update. Charlayne Hunter-Gault has that story.
A 1985 study first showed that limited surgery combined with
radiation therapy works just as well as extensive surgery as
a treatment for small breast tumors. The smaller operation is
known as a lumpectomy. Removal of the entire breast is
known as mastectomy. But last year, fraud charges against one
of the researchers raised doubts about the study. Today, the
"New England Journal of Medicine" has published the latest findings,
upholding the study. Here to tell us what it all
means is Dr. Christine Berg, the director of the Breast
Radiation Oncology Section at Georgetown University Medical Center. And Dr.
Berg, tell us about first the original study and its
conclusions and then what led to the controversy. I'd be
very happy to, Charlayne. The study was conceived quite a
number of years ago to look at the best treatment
for the breast for women with early-stage breast cancer. And
the goal was to find out which types of treatments
would be most appropriate. There were three groups of women,
one group treated with mastectomy, the removal of the whole
breast, another treated with lumpectomy alone, and then a third
group treated with lumpectomy with radiation. The study was first
published in 1985, and then updated in 1989, and then
the results at that time indicated that the treatment arms
were identical in terms of long-term survival. All three of
them. All three of them. As, as you mentioned--So
that, in other words, a woman didn't have to go
to the radical step of having her whole breast removed,
but could have the lumpectomy or just, or the lumpectomy
with radiation, the lesser? A woman could opt to have
both lumpectomy with the radiation, or the mastectomy. The lumpectomy
alone arm is showing a higher in-breast recurrence rate, and
so we're advocating treatment either with the lumpectomy with radiation
or the mastectomy. But then a controversy arose because there
were suggestions that the study was tainted, right? Yes. The
controversy arose because the group that did the study, the
National Surgical Adjuvant Breast Project, NSABP, noticed that some of
the data from one investigator in Montreal was tainted, and
they found that out of the over three hundred patients
that he had enrolled six of those patients had data
that was not accurate. How bad was it? I mean,
how tainted was it? Well, it--what he had done
was, you know, for like a date of surgery, he
had--in order to ensure that the woman met the
entry criteria, he might have modified the date by a
few days. And so it--you know--it didn't all--
and he knew that he was modifying the date. Modifying
what date? The date that the woman would have originally
had the surgery. Oh, I see. You have to start
the treatment, you know, the radiation with a certain number
of days, you know, to meet the study entry criteria.
And in order to ensure that a woman might be
still eligible, he would push the date of the surgery
up a little bit--And that--Well--And that could
affect the outcome? Well, one would then wonder about is
he accurately reporting all of the information about the women
in terms of their results. Okay. So what does today's
audit show? Today's audit went back and investigated all of
the charts from the major institutions that participated in the
trial. The National Cancer Institute sent out a team of
76 investigators to pull these records, look over all the
important details regarding the dates of treatment, the results of
treatment, to confirm the validity of the information; they went
to the charts individually and pulled those and looked at
them. And they verified that the data that had been
entered into the analysis was accurate. And so now the
conclusion takes us back to the original study. The conclusion--
in parallel with the audit, the "New England Journal of
Medicine" published a--the update, the 12-year update of the
NSABP results, confirming that lumpectomy and radiation when compared directly
to mastectomy is identical in terms of long-term disease-free survival
for women. So in terms of the women out there,
I think the incidence now is about 180,000, is that
right? That's correct, in 1995. What should they be thinking
now, and what would you be telling them? Yes. I
deal with this every day. I mean, I see a
lot of women with breast cancer. I think the most
important thing for them to do is to gather information
about the particulars of their situation, discuss with their physician,
or even better, a group of physicians to find out
what's best for them. All right. Well, Dr. Berg, thank
you for joining us. Thank you very much. Finally tonight,
a Gergen dialogue. David Gergen, editor-at-large of "U.S. News &
World Report," engages Microsoft chairman Bill Gates. Gates has written
The Road Ahead, a book about the future of the
information highway. Mr. Gates, the message of your book is,
or seems to me, is that the next 20 years
will bring more revolutionary changes in the information age than
all of the changes we've seen heretofore. Can you explain
that? The key idea is that the personal computer so
far has just changed the way we create documents. But
as we connect them together, it becomes a revolution in
communications, an ability to find people with common interests, to
explore any subject, to know what's going on. It becomes
an electronic marketplace, where anybody who has consulting services they
want to offer can declare that, and it's easy to
find them and hook up and even do video conferencing
so the work can be delivered that way. So it's
a big step forward in making the world a smaller
place and allowing us to exercise curiosity that we never
could before. Most of the people that talk to you
about your book discuss technological aspects. I'd like to talk
about the other part of it, and that is the
social implications of these changes. You've just recently gotten married,
and I'm really curious, as you think about the possibility
of having kids, do you think we ought to embrace
as a nation the goal that every American child should
be computer literate before graduating from school? I think we
are going to have to make that a clear goal
because people who agree that this is a great tool
should want everyone to have the opportunity that it represents.
Kids start out with a lot of curiosity. They want
to explore subjects, and the classroom environment makes it tough
for things to be individually tailored. If you're a little
bit slower, a little bit faster, you want to learn
it in a different way, the computer can provide that.
The explosion of publishing up on the Internet is a
wonderful thing, and now teachers are taking their multimedia lessons
and contributing them for free to a repository that other
teachers can go in to and get. And students can
go all over the world and find other kids learning
the same thing. So I think it really should be
something that is available in the same way that books
are available to everyone today. The question then becomes, and
you raise this in your book but you don't quite
answer it--I'm curious what you think--how do we
begin closing some of these gaps? I was quite struck,
for example, there was a survey in "USA Today" recently
about computers in homes by racial or ethnic group. Now,
listen to these numbers. In Asian homes, 40 percent of
Asian homes now have computers, 29 percent of white homes,
only 13 percent of Hispanic and 11 percent of black
homes. How do we--how should we go about it?
If every child should be computer literate, how do we
go about closing that kind of gap? Well, I think
there is a big correlation where you have a strong
family structure that puts a high value on education, the
PC tends to move up in their priorities. And those
figures are rather stunning. I think even if you took
out the income effect, you'd still see a potentially growing
problem of, of the opportunity that kids might have there.
Now, there will always be families that can't afford it,
to have it at home, even if they want to,
and so the school and the library are going to
have to be two places where access is available. The
PC is improving quite a bit and it's over the
next five years where I think that the content will
be so much better, the communications networks will be so
much better. The PC will be so much better. That's
the timeframe where we ought to solve this problem of
making it available to everyone. If you go out far
enough, maybe the PC will be cheap enough for most
homes, but I don't think we can wait that long
before we, we provide access. You've, interestingly enough, you're taking
the proceeds from your book and donating them to schools,
to teachers who introduce computers. But you note in your
book that schools have been far slower to introduce computers,
personal computers, than have businesses. In fact, there was a--
there was a piece in the "Wall Street Journal," they
had a big technology section about a week ago which
pointed out that some 60 percent of teachers now have
access to computers but only about 40 percent of them
are incorporating their curriculums. A lot of the teachers don't
seem to know how to use them. They haven't been
trained to know how to use computers, so even though
a city like Detroit can go out and buy a
lot of computers, the teachers, themselves, are not prepared to
teach them in the classrooms. How do we deal with
that? Well, there's a lot to be done. The people
who write textbooks are having to revise those to bring
interactive in to it, and so as the school boards
qualify the next round of textbooks, they'll have to make
that requirement. Training teachers is a big, big deal here.
If your teacher isn't enthusiastic about, embracing it, then there's
no way it's going to get the right use in
the classroom, and then you've got to have not only
the equipment but also the communications connections. And if we're
in balance to providing a few of those and not
the other elements, then it's a waste. One of the
other things that's been true for a while is that
computer usage seems to be more male-oriented than female-oriented. How
do we overcome that gender difference? It's been kind of
a game-oriented motivation which has really pushed towards the boys
who are out there to explore wild things. You just
need to invent more software for girls then, right? Well,
that's going on. A lot of the new software is
very creative, not so much violent games but rather exploration
and things where kids go together and do things. Once
somebody's a user, and they have the confidence that they
can do one thing with a computer, then they branch
out. They find other areas, and it's, it's stunning how
far they go. I've seen this with senior citizens that
start out maybe just with electronic mail or doing their
taxes or playing a game. Then they'll--they'll have the
impetus to go on and be big-time Web surfers. But
that, that first set of learning, people are afraid to
look dumb. They think maybe I'm the person who can't
do it. And so you either have to have a
friend who steps you through it, or you've got to
have an environment where it's other people you can relate
to, or you're all equally nervous about it, and there
is a little bit of learning to go on. There’s
been a debate and literature about whether, you know, getting
too into computers is socially isolating or not. You write
more optimistically that it helps to create social circles and
reach out for more friends. I'm really interested in a
different issue, and that is whether--we found is that
people as they move from city to suburb became less
engaged in civic activities, they became less involved in community-related
activities. How do we overcome the possibility that as people
get hooked into their computers, just as they got hooked
into television, the electronic world becomes so much more important
to them that they'll care much less about what's happening
outside their door? Well, I hope that the computer is
a tool to help you get more involved with what's
going on in your community. I mean, part of the
hallmark of the United States versus other countries is the
civic involvement, the willingness to get involved in charitable activities.
When you're reading about, oh, politics, today those short little
articles that just have the latest scrap, it makes it
very tough to say understand a budget trade-off, you know,
what the vote for or against is, or what is
my representative saying, you know, are they still trying to
make up their mind, are they interested in what I
have to say, what is their voting record on this
issue, and so I think if you have the latest
article there, you can just click to see how the
money is spent, what are those programs. You can then
join a bulletin board group where you get notified on
new things or decide to have a meeting. I think
it makes it much easier to get involved. Government is
so complex, so large that it's pretty daunting to try
and say, I've got the expertise to say some new
law about transportation is a mistake. And I hope that
by politicians putting up their speeches and the bills being
there and different points of view, that people will choose
to get reengaged and find that these are issues that,
that they can understand and make a contribution to. Now,
some people go as far as to say that, you
know, we'll try out direct democracy using electronic devices. If
that would get people more involved, maybe it would be
a good thing. One final question. You may be having
kids in the future. How do you plan to raise
your children--have you thought about it--with regard to
a computer? A lot of time on the computers, would
you limit the amount of time they might spend on
computers as they grow up so that they have some
other outside activities? Using a computer is something we're going
to have to break down into different kinds of activities.
I mean, take reading; you don't want your kids to
read comic books all the time, but if they're reading
great literature, you probably will let 'em spend, spend as
much time as they want. And so we'll have to
have a tool where a parent without being invasive can
get a sense of how is the kid using the
computer and even set a time budget for certain kinds
of activities and, therefore, shape what the kid does. My
parents prevented my sister and I from watching TV when
we were growing up, and I frankly, I'm glad they
did. We ended up reading quite a bit and I
don't think we missed all, all that much. So parental
control over how kids spend their time, I think it's
a worthy trade-off. Thank you. Again, the major stories of
this Thursday, Senate Republicans reluctantly began to support sending U.S.
troops to Bosnia. The Secretaries of State and Defense testified
about the President's Bosnia strategy on Capitol Hill, and deadlocked
budget negotiators cancelled their talks until Monday. We'll see you
tomorrow night with our weekly political analysis, among other things.
I'm Jim Lehrer. Thank you and good night.
