content
Good evening, I'm Jim Lehrer. On the NewsHour tonight, excerpts
from last night's Republican candidate forum in New Hampshire, with
analysis by Tom Oliphant and David Brooks, substituting for Mark
Shields and Paul Gigot; a Terence Smith look at the
opening of a new front in the TV morning news
war; and a Ray Suarez conversation with the new president
of Nigeria. It all follows our summary of the news
this Friday. President Clinton today proposed new rules to protect
patients' privacy. They'd be the first federal regulations designed to
keep computerized medical records confidential. They'd prevent the release of
sensitive files to employers, marketers, and others without patient consent.
They'd also allow patients to see who has viewed the
material and take legal action against anyone who abuses it.
The President spoke at the White House. Today with a click
of a mouse personal health information can easily and now
legally be passed around without patients' consent to people who
aren't doctors, for reasons that have nothing to do with
health care. Americans should never have to worry that their
employers are looking at the medications they take or the
ailments they've had. In 1999, Americans should never have to
worry about nightmare scenarios depicted in George Orwell's "1984." The
new privacy rules would go into effect in the year
2002 following public review. On Wall Street today, the stock
market kept climbing, the Dow Jones Industrial Average closed up
107 points at 10,729; the NASDAQ Index was up 91
points and closed at a record 2,966. It was an
apparent continuation of a rally started yesterday on government reports
of steady growth and low inflation in the third quarter.
The Senate today shelved a bill extending new trade privileges
to countries in Africa and the Caribbean. It would have
lowered tariffs and quotas on imports. Senators from textile-producing states
voted against it. Trade will be one of the issues
addressed during an interview with the president of Nigeria later
in our program tonight. Russia rejected international calls for diplomacy
and launched a new wave of attacks on Chechnya today.
Russian air force and artillery pounded the capital Grozny and
several villages. Troops blocked off border crossings, stranding thousands of
refugees. In Moscow, U.S. Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott
met with Russian Foreign Minister Ivanov. He spoke about the
situation. We understand that Russia is grappling with a very
real and very grave threat in the form of extremism
and terrorism, and that obviously the Russian federation has not
just a right, but an obligation to protect the Russian
state and protect Russian citizens. It's the hope of the
United States, and I think many others in the international
community, that Russia will find a way of addressing this
extremely serious challenge in a way that minimizes as much
as possible a civilian casualties, the loss of innocent lives.
Back in this country today, a plot to kill people
at a Cleveland high school using guns and explosives was
uncovered. Authorities closed the school. Mayor Michael White said four
students had been arrested and were being held in custody.
The "Cleveland Plain Dealer" newspaper reported the plan was similar
to the one carried out earlier this year at Columbine
High School in Colorado. Fifteen people were killed in that
attack. Republican presidential candidates faced off in New Hampshire last
night. They took part in a town meeting-style debate at
Dartmouth College. Absent was Texas Governor George W. Bush. The
five others answered questions on issues such as taxes and
abortion. We'll have excerpts right after this News Summary. Rhode
Islanders paid their last respects to Senator John Chafee today.
Chafee's body lay in state in the rotunda of the
capitol building in providence. The 77-year-old Republican died of heart
failure on Sunday. President Clinton, cabinet members, and members of
Congress plan to attend a memorial service for Chafee tomorrow.
There was a memorial service for golfer Payne Stewart today
in Orlando. He and five others were killed Monday when
their Learjet mysteriously veered off course and crashed in South
Dakota. Golfers Tiger Woods and Mark O'Meara were among those
who attended today's service. Two professional golf tournaments postponed action
so Stewart's colleagues could attend. The chief investigator into the
crash said today the Learjet was traveling 600 miles an
hour when it hit the ground. He based that on
the condition of the cockpit voice recorder. Millions of New
York Yankee fans lined Broadway today to cheer their World
Series champs through the city's canyon of heroes. The team
was given a traditional ticker tape parade, riding on half-a-dozen,
specially designed floats. A rally at city hall wrapped up the
day's festivities. The Yankees clinched a record 25th World Series
title on Wednesday. And that's it for the News Summary
tonight. Now it's on to the Republicans in New Hampshire,
analysis by Oliphant and Brooks, the new front in the
morning news wars, and the new president of Nigeria. Last
night we had the Democratic presidential candidates in action. Tonight,
it's the Republicans. Five of them were on stage last
night in a town meeting format at Dartmouth College in
Hanover, New Hampshire. Texas Governor George W. Bush did not
participate. Here are excerpts from the event. Good evening, and
thank you all very much for joining us here in
New Hampshire tonight. Let's begin with our first question. Should
the Republican Party be more inclusive by encouraging pro-choice voters
to support their candidates? I worry a great deal about
the unintended consequences of sending a message that we are
not an inclusionary party. I am a proud pro-life person.
I have a 17-year record on that issue. But I
believe that we must begin a dialogue and a discussion
on the issue of abortion. Both pro-life and pro-choice people
believe very strongly that we need to eliminate abortion. I
and my wife, Cindy, are proud adoptive parents. We need
to encourage adoption in America. We need to match up
those children that have no families with those families that
have no children. We need to improve foster care dramatically
in America. We can work together. And my party, which
is proud of its pro-life position and I am proud
of it, should send the word, we want you in
our party. We can have respectful disagreements on specific issues
and we can work together on this one. I thank
you. Thank you, Senator. I'd like to hear the Senator's
position on Second Amendment rights, and if elected, what his
policy would be toward the recent wave of litigation facing
the firearms industry. Well let me tell you something. When
it comes to constitutional...expressed constitutional provisions--and the second
amendment is one of those expressed provisions--you've got to
be very loathe to try and change that provision by
mere statute. So I am a strong supporter of Second
Amendment rights. I am also a strong criticizer of this
administration, because there are people being killed in our society
today because they're not enforcing the law. Parents are afraid
to have their kids go to school because they don't
know whether those kids are going to be safe in
schools. They're worried to death about it. And the reason
they are is because 12,000 kids and adults took guns
to school in the last two years in violation of
law. Guess how many prosecutions by this administration? Thirteen. I'll
tell you what I'd do. If you commit a crime
with the use of a gun and you have a
gun on you, it's an automatic ten years without parole.
If you fire that gun, it's an automatic 20 years.
If you hurt somebody with that gun, it's an automatic
life. How do you plan to continue with the war
on drugs? When I was born in 1950, we didn't
have a huge plethora of laws dealing with all kinds
of drug use and abuse, and yet we also did
not have an enormous drug problem in this country. The
reason that we proliferated the laws is because the fundamental
discipline that was prevailing in our society when I was
born has broken down. We have a crisis that goes
to the heart of the question of whether or not
we're a people that still acknowledges that there is a
difference between right and wrong which we must pass on
to our children and enforce, even if it means that
we ourselves must accept inconvenience. Thank you, Mr. Keyes. When
we face that reality, then we will have solved the
problem. I would like to know whether you would want
to change the immigration quotas: Increase them, decrease them, leave
them the same? I think back of my time in
Newport, Kentucky, when I was growing up. It was a
tough, blue-collar town, and I remember in elementary school we
would all stand in line to get milk. And then
the school bully would come along and get in the
front of the line and nobody could do anything about
it because he was bigger than anybody else. Well, we
have millions of people around the world that are standing
in line to get into the United States. They see
it as that shining city on a hill that the
Founding Fathers talked about and that Ronald Reagan reminded us
of all the time. They're playing by the rules, they're
abiding by the law, and we allow countless people to
butt into the front of the line, to pour across
our borders and have as their first act as entering
our country the violation of our laws. We must secure
our border. A great nation should not have borders that
are unsecured; and I believe if we do that, then
we can make a judgment as a people what the
appropriate legal immigration levels ought to be. I'd really like
to be able to ask this to the candidate who's
not here but I can't do that. Mr. Forbes, as
nominee of the Republican Party or as President, what would
you do to keep the future nominations from being bought?
Like you, I share the frustration that Governor Bush is
not here tonight. He didn't come to a debate last
week because he had a fundraiser. A couple of weeks
ago, his plane got delayed. He had a choice between
a fundraiser and going to a school in Rhode Island
with underprivileged kids. He chose the fundraiser. So perhaps in
the future at a forum like this--if we call
it a fundraiser--he might show up. But seriously, to
get to your question, we should have a system in
America where individuals can give as much as they want
to a candidate as long as there is full and
prompt disclosure. The establishment loves these current rules because, unless
you are blest like me with independent resources, they have
ways of shutting you out and all 67,000 lobbyists in
Washington--they have all rallied around Governor Bush; they want
a coronation, not a real contest, and that's fundamentally wrong.
We want to ask each of you, do you favor
a flat tax? If so, at exactly what rate? And
I'm going to begin on the left with Senator Hatch.
Well, naturally, I favor throwing out the current system and
getting rid of this awful IRS Code. In fact, if
I had my way, we'd get rid of the IRS
and come up with the most fair, simple, decent, honorable
system we can have. But I'll tell you something, I worry
about a flat tax because I'm on the Senate Finance
Committee. And I can tell you, we spend a lot
of time just figuring out where all these little things
go. And it's just a natural propensity in Congress to
see us add more and more to that tax code
until we satisfy just about every citizen in America. And
it's killing our country. Sure I'm for a flat tax.
I'm for a tax system where average Americans can fill
out their taxes on a postcard and send it in,
and not have the fear of an audit. But, my
dear friends, do you know why the tax code is
44,000 pages long? Do you know why it's a nightmare,
a chamber of horrors for average citizens and a cornucopia
of good deals for the special interests? The special interests
rule in Washington. The big money, the huge six and
seven-figure contributions that come in, that every time we pass
a tax bill we add another special loophole and a
special deal for the special interests. I'm for reform. I'm
for reform of education, reforming the military, reforming the tax
code. My dear friends, that's not possible. That's not possible
when average Americans are no longer represented in Washington, DC.
And I will fight to the last breath I draw
to eliminate the influence of special interests in the tax
code and every other part of America, and I will
not rest until I give the government back to you.
Thank you. Ambassador Keyes. The income tax is a form
of taxation that was advocated by Marx and Lenin because
it cedes, in principle, to the government control of every
last dollar that is made or earned in the economy.
Think about it. And this country was not founded with
an income tax. The founders put in the Constitution provisions
that made an income tax unconstitutional--a direct tax on
our people, government dipping directly into our pocket to spend
our money before we get a chance to say anything
about it. The issue isn't the tax rate and the
issue isn't whether it's flat or progressive. The issue is
the income tax itself. I am an abolitionist; shouldn't surprise
you. I think that just as we had to get
rid of chattel slavery in the last century, we need
to get rid of tax slavery at the end of
the 20th century so our children in the 21st will
have control of every last dollar they earn. And the
government won't get a say in what is done with
that money until after they deal with it and then,
in the open marketplace, you put a sales tax on
transactions in that marketplace. Ambassador Keyes, thank you very much.
Mr. Bauer. I grew up in a home where my
father was a janitor. I'm used to having bills last
till Friday when the paycheck only lasted till Thursday. And
so my flat tax proposal recognizes that the real wealth
of America is in our families. I have a 16
percent across-the-board rate. You would be able to keep your
mortgage deduction and your charitable deduction. And everybody would pay
the 16 percent: The waitress and the corporation. Now, Steve
has a plan that he'll elaborate on. But Steve has
a major new write-off in his plan for big business.
He allows the big corporations to write off the entire
cost of their investments in the year that they make
them. Well, this is a delightful evening...because when I
ran four years ago, virtually every Republican denounced the idea
of a flat tax. So education works. Some are slower
than others, but they're coming along. Now, Gary, you are
wrong. I give generous deductions and exemptions to each adult
and each child. A family of four, a family of
four, such as the Daley family in Exeter, New Hampshire,
their first $41,000 of income is free of federal income
tax; above the $41,000 level for the Daley family, only
17 cents on the dollar above $41,000; no tax on
pensions; no tax on capital gains; and no death taxes.
You'll be allowed to leave the world unmolested by the
IRS...sort of a new principle of taxation...no taxation
without respiration. And as a businessman, as a businessman, I
have incentives for investment. If you tell a farmer you
can't recover the cost of your tractor, you ruin him.
You tell a restaurant owner they can't recover the cost
of the equipment, you ruin them. I provide for jobs.
I provide a tax break for all. And I'm glad
they're coming on board. Mr. Forbes, thank you very much.
That's it. Thanks to Dartmouth and to all of you.
Now, analysis of last night's Republican event as well as
the Democrats' on Wednesday night. We get it from "Boston
Globe" columnist Tom Oliphant, and David Brooks, senior editor at
the "Weekly Standard." Mark Shields and Paul Gigot are both
off tonight. First, last night's Republican event. Tom, what struck
you as the most important thing that happened? The most...
leaving Bush aside, for a second, leaving Governor Bush aside,
John McCain has gone to ground in New Hampshire for
the last month. Traveling all over the state, pushing very
hard--a different version of what he's been saying in
the last several months; namely, that reform can be a
conservative word. And people saw it last night I think
in a larger audience for the first time and also
saw somebody really working for it now. McCain is sometimes
a laidback figure. But on Thursday night he was a
wired figure. He was working for it. And I think
after it was all over, most of the talk was
about him. You agree, David? Yes. I think it was.
I would say the most important thing was that George
W. slept in his bed in Austin and didn't come
up there, because there are two things the Republicans want
answered from the debates. The first one is how lightweight
is George W. Bush? Can he take the pressure? He
wasn't there to answer that question. The second is something
Tom referred to, which is that John McCain and George
Bush too are trying to move the party away from
Newt Gingrich and Dick Armey and Barry Goldwater-that whole
movement of conservatism which was an antigovernment movement-that's something
McCain and Bush are moving away from. What they talk
about is limited but energetic government. They talk about using
government in an affirmative way and a conservative way. They
talk about restoring faith in public service. What they're doing
is they're going back to a Teddy Roosevelt, Abraham Lincoln
style of Republicanism. Teddy Roosevelt said I'm the hero of
San Juan Hill; only you can trust me to reform
government, to take on those special interests. Well, who's saying
that today? That's John McCain. So-just if I could finish,
Steve Forbes came to the debate yesterday armed to the
teeth to take this on. He was going to call
it tax-and-spend conservatism. But because Bush wasn't there and because
the way the questions were asked, he didn't get a
chance to launch that argument but it's an argument the
Republican Party has to have. Indeed before the debate, the
many people who are well paid by the Forbes campaign
were circulating these rather large tomes documenting sins of spending
and taxation by Governor Bush...In Texas? Yes, as governor.
And then just not delivered. Whereas McCain came to that
debate armed with stuff he was going to put out,
which he then did. And I was struck, not just
by him, but by some of the others about how
thoroughly put together their campaigns are intellectually at this point.
And that is a distinction with Governor Bush, I would
argue at this point. What do you mean, Tom? Well,
McCain on taxes I think would be a good example
last night. He's saying, look, that thing that passed Congress
and Clinton vetoed a month or two ago, half of
it was just special interest garbage that weighed it down.
If you have real reform, you won't have those special
interest goodies in a tax cut bill; you'll have rate
cuts for people. That was his message. Reform can work
for conservatives. Governor Bush is still a ways away from
even having a position on taxes. I'm not sure I
agree with that. I think he has given speeches which
were tremendously effective and intellectually coherent, Governor Bush. What he
said he-I stand for governing conservatism--not the opposition
conservatism of Newt Gingrich and Dick Armey, not the no,
no, no. He said I stand for using government. He
and McCain both say that, but they say it in
different spheres. Bush is more comfortable talking about education, charity,
poverty programs, using government very specifically in those areas. McCain
is less comfortable talking about that; he's more comfortable talking
about national reform, international activism. What about the fight that's
going on to the right of those two men, essentially
between Forbes and Bauer at this point? How did that
appearance last night affect that, do you think? Well, the
amazing thing, the first...let's talk about the context. This
was a party run by the conservative movement, by the
Goldwaterites three years ago. The two major candidates, the two
top contenders are not in that tradition-McCain and Bush
are not in that Goldwater tradition. Bauer and Forbes are
fighting for that tradition. And I would say on the
conservative buzz over the past year, over the past few
weeks, has been the fall of Steve Forbes. He's been
running for office for five years. He spent $60 million.
He's at 4 percent nationally, he's almost nowhere in New
Hampshire. He's slightly above Bauer and Keyes and Hatch, and
so they're fighting over what is turning out to be
a small rump. And I think Bauer is doing quite
a good job in part because Forbes is bleeding--just
interest among his true believers is bleeding. There is a
substantive element, I think, to it as well. Bauer's economic
version of flat tax is a little bit more populist,
a little bit more aimed downscale. You could almost sense
last night him aiming for what's left of the Pat
Buchanan vote in 1996. Listen to what he said on
education...immigration rather-That is a Pat Buchanan issue. Indeed,
very much so. But it's at the margins and you
can feel it there. There is this incredible prosperity in
New Hampshire. This is not an angry state the way
it was eight years ago. And I think the politics
on the Republican side reflects that. Speaking in pure political
terms now, what does the fact that George W. Bush
was not there last night, what does that mean and
how does that hurt Bush, if at all? Well, this
is the third or fourth element running in a story
running for four weeks now. You don't come here enough.
They say that in Iowa too; when you come, you
don't say much. Your positions aren't that fleshed out in
the sense that they make sense to an individual voter.
And you got to start working for it. Now he
can change all that in a New York minute. But
there has been...A New Hampshire minute. New Hampshire minute,
it takes longer. That's about 95 seconds, I think, the
last I heard. So he can change it. But the
dynamic for the last month has been one thing after
another and really for the last week all he communicated
in New Hampshire was why he wasn't coming. Does he
hurt himself? Yes. I think he has. First, it's a
sign is he too smug? And in New Hampshire, they're
only allowed to be smug. No one else is allowed
to be smug in New Hampshire. But, secondly because he
needs practice. The guy has not been out debating. There
were some weird questions last night about marijuana, industrial hemp
or whatever. And more are coming. NASA--you need practice.
So, he needs some help on that. Finally, he is
going to show up and debate finally, and when that
comes, us media types are going to be there in
force. And if he had shown up at all, no
individual debate would be so important. But if he only
shows up at a few, each one is mammoth. And
a mistake there becomes catastrophic. The Democrats--your analysis of
how Gore did the other night, David. I'm a little
outside what I see the polls are today. I thought
Bradley wiped the floor with him. I thought Bradley said-
came out and said, I'm a grown-up guy. I'm sitting
here telling you what I believe. Al Gore struck me,
he took the focus group Viagra...and he just came
out and said-What? You said focus group Viagra? Yes.
Somebody compared him to an animal that had been caged
up, and they let him loose, and he was oozing
empathy and doing these cheap tricks. I thought the trick
of staying later after the cameras and going on for
another 90 minutes, somebody said it looked like a kid
who volunteers for more homework. I though it just looks
artificial. And that plays into the line the Bradley people
have been pitching, which is that he's the authentic candidate
and Gore is the synthetic candidate. Bradley is dull but
dignified, Gore is Cheese Whiz. And I think that debate
to me, that underlined that Bradley line. Tom. That's a
lot of certainty which I can't match. Try. A little
bit more agnostic, perhaps. Maybe as a little clue to
what I thought was happening. You know, everybody gets asked
who's your favorite President. That's a standard one. I don't
know if Bush is ready for it, but these guys
get it all the time. He better say...Exactly. That's
easy. But Senator Bradley has always for some obscure reason
included James K. Polk in his pantheon of heroes. And
on Wednesday night James K. Polk was missing. And I'm
thinking why is that? I think he is beginning to
realize that he is the favorite in New Hampshire and
perhaps in the Northeast, and he's adjusting to it a
little bit awkwardly. And I think his own people had
a little problem with his performance Wednesday night because they
thought he might have been a little stiff and a
little bit standoffish. But is that the natural Bill Bradley?
Mostly. I didn't think he was as engaged in the
audience as he is in his meetings when you almost
feel like you're having a conversation with him. It's that
intimate and successful...a little less so Wednesday night. Gore,
people could see what's going on for the last six
weeks. It appears to have stabilized the situation in New
Hampshire. One reason I shrink from David's certainty here....I
said I was outside the mainstream. You know-I hear
what you're saying and I think it's entirely valid. What
holds me back is that I have experienced some of
this Gore-these Gore meetings. They can go on for
two or three hours. I mean, he stays until the
last question is asked. It could be UFO's, it could
be paving roads in northern New Hampshire. He'll just stay.
And some people in the national press had an opportunity
Wednesday night to actually see what this is like. You
walked into that room afterwards. He sat there for two
hours on the stage with his stage dangling over--with
his wife, just having a conversation. And it works. There
is a personal connection that goes on. And it is
a different kind of relationship between Gore and voters than
there was, say in September. What's different is that this
is a close race. It feels like Ford-Reagan in 1976.
And that's what holds me back from saying one of
them is pulling way out in front. But are the
two of you are talking from two different perspectives? You're
talking about the way they project on television. You're talking
about the way they project closeup--in other words, retail-wholesale.
Well, yes, except the coverage of Gore in New Hampshire
and Iowa is more intimate, also and I think that
accounts for some of the stabilizing that's gone on. Do
you agree, David, with what Tom said, that the race
feels close? Oh, absolutely. I mean the polls are now
within four or five points. And you can sense it
in the way Gore is attacking. His people clearly think
he's best on the attack. To me, again it's a
little weird. It's like watching an eagle scout trying to
mug somebody. I don't find him persuasive. But I think
the thing they know is that he can't be defensive.
And there's also the question of how much Bradley wants
this. If the race gets nasty, Bradley's always been this
aloof guy. Is he really going to fight back? Example.
Save for another time. Thank you both, gentlemen. Still to
come on the NewsHour tonight, the morning news wars and
the president of Nigeria. Media Correspondent Terence Smith has the
morning news story. For the past five months, CBS News
has been getting ready to do battle. Its weapon...a
30 million dollar state of the art street level studio
in the heart of New York City. Next week, the
network will launch a fresh assault in the high-stakes morning
news television wars. This week veteran anchor Bryant Gumbel and
newcomer Jane Clayson led a parade of press around their
new set. A lot of work remained to be done
to get it ready by 7 AM Monday, when they
plan to broadcast live from this pricey piece of real
estate on Fifth Avenue. A few blocks away, other familiar
faces are already dueling in the Disneyesque precincts of Times
Square. I just want you to know, I'm not running
for anything. Charlie Gibson and Diane Sawyer of ABC getting
up close and personal with their indoor audience at Good
Morning America's new glass-walled, street-level venue...I'm Matt Lauer along
with Katie Couric and we've come down to check these
people out. And NBC's Today Show hosts sharing face time
with folks gathered outside their famous sidewalk studio in Rockefeller
Center. It's going to be a full-fledged, three-way war. Three-way
wars are a lot more fun than two-way wars, I
think. Executive producer Steve Friedman spent 10 years at the
Today Show, helping raise it to the top of the
morning news heap, where it remains today. Now CBS News
is counting on him to lift its perennial also-ran morning
show into the thick of the competition. Katie Couric and
Matt Lauer, the hosts of the Today Show, responded to
Friedman's battle cry. It's television, I hardly would describe it
as war. If it's war, I'm not a soldier in
it. It is war, I guess in a financial sense.
I mean there's a lot at stake. The morning's are
hot. The way the marketplace is right now on morning
television, it's the only time in network television where the
total audience is growing. Morning television is the new frontier,
the new war, the new way networks can make their
move on news. Indeed they can. In the last five
years the number of American homes with television sets in
use from 7 AM to 9 AM has grown 11
percent. The Today Show alone has 34 percent more viewers
than it had five years ago. You have people who
get up at the same time or even earlier now
because they have longer commutes, there is more traffic. They
have less time to scrub their face and change the
dog dish. And they want their news, they want their
information before they leave the house, so when they go
to the office and stand around the water cooler, they're
informed. Author Richard Hack, a former columnist for TV Guide,
has written "Madness in the Morning," an account of the
45-year competition among the morning news broadcasts. He notes that
while the morning news audience is growing, the evening audience
is shrinking...substantially. That audience has decreased. And it has
decreased not only because people have these longer commutes; sometimes
they don't make it back home in time for the
evening news, but because when they do get home, they
have more time to look at cable, to look at
the Internet; to have any number of distractions that previously
weren't even in existence. And there is network gold to
be mined in the morning. The economic stakes for Good
Morning America and the other network news shows in the
morning are huge, they share a gross revenue pool of
about 600 million dollars worth of advertising; if one of
these can increase it's ratings by one point it brings
in an extra $70 million in revenue. Steve Friedman says
that CBS realizes in order to be competitive as a
network overall they must be a player in the morning.
The fact is, financially, the difference between being first and
third in the evening might be 15 to 18 million
dollars. Financially, the difference between being first and third in
the morning is $150 million. That's why Diane Sawyer's there.
That's why Bryant Gumbel came back. That's why NBC pays
Katie Couric 6 or 7 million dollars. That's why people
at CBS would invest tens of millions of dollars in
a street level studio, just to get us on the
playing field. If CBS does even modestly well in the
morning, it will quickly make back the tens of millions
it spent building this new studio and begin to amortize
Bryant Gumbel's five-million-dollar a year salary. Gumbel, who recently anchored
the failed prime time CBS newsmagazine Public Eye, concedes that
the stakes are high. Look, I'm aware that CBS has
a considerable investment in this. I'm aware that there are
people who are going to be anxious to, to see
how the Bryant Gumbel on CBS compares with the Bryant
Gumbel of, of NBC years. Gumbel has always been a
lightening rod in the morning. His fans see him as
a probing interviewer, his critics as arrogant. Steve Friedman is
familiar with both reactions. Bryant Gumbel is a different kind
of television performer. Most people on television, no matter who
they are, do say to the audience, "I want you
to like me." Bryant does not. Bryant says to the
audience, "I want you to respect me." He never asks
the audience to like him. He'll never have a Sally
Field moment. Over the last four decades, morning news has
changed--but not a lot. The Today Show debuted in
1952 with the garrulous Dave Garroway, paired at one point
with J. Fred Muggs, the chimp. CBS soon followed with
newsman Walter Cronkite, aided and abetted by a puppet Lion,
Charlemagne...the morning shows have always been a mix of
news, features and low-rent entertainment. The Today Show pioneered the
latest "New Big Thing"--the Streetside Studio--40 years ago.
All these people out here are all going to work,
I think. They may be late too as a matter
of fact, but they're on 49th Street right outside our
communications center here. Reinventing itself, the Today Show brought the
street level view back in 1994. The broadcast quickly pulled
into first place and has remained there for 200-plus weeks.
Good Morning America felt it needed a face-lift too. This
fall it rolled out its own state of the art
studio. Anchor Diane Sawyer likes the interaction with the audience.
It's automatic energy. It's orange juice. It's a B-12 shot,
to have people wandering in off the street, and they
look up, and there you are, and maybe Garth Brooks
is singing or a camel is--had too much fiber.
Anything can be happening in the morning when they're going
by. Charles Gibson says that Good Morning America has evolved
into something very different from what he first started doing
nearly 13 years ago. It is a much more spontaneous
broadcast. It is off script. It's basically what's going through
your head at the moment, and it's also pushing toward
a little bit more high energy, and that's the reason
for these changes in sets. Sawyer seems to revel in
the more relaxed atmosphere of morning television. Here she watches
underwear model Antonio Sabato demonstrate his fitness with a two
finger pushup...and when the cameras stop rolling, she tries
it herself, in front of a live audience. But what
about CBS? Even with its new studio and a familiar
face in Bryant Gumbel and a fresh face in Jane
Clayson, can the network rise from its perennial third place
status in the morning? Who else is going to be
part of the cast? Bill Carroll of the Katz Television
Group is not so sure. He advises network-affiliated stations on
programming. Most CBS affiliates, he says, are making money with
their own local news broadcasts in the crucial seven-to-eight o'clock
hour. One of the big hurdles they're going to have
to face is in the most recent CBS morning incarnation,
a number of their stations established a 7:00 to 8:00
AM local presence, and a very successful local presence, and
in many of those markets, they're going to take a
"wait and see" attitude on the Bryant Gumbel effort. But
doesn't that condemn the new CBS effort to lower ratings?
Yeah, it's going to be a problem. What are you
going to recommend to your clients, the affiliates? Leave the
local news that's working at 7:00 o'clock, and run the
new Bryant Gumbel Early Show at 8:00 o'clock. CBS reported
this week that three-quarters of its affiliates plan to carry
the new broadcast in its entirety. Bryant Gumbel says the
key to overcoming the remaining affiliate reluctance is, well, news.
Our first half hour is going to be as hard
a news half hour as there is on television and
as comprehensive a, a news half hour as there is
on television because we firmly believe, that if you don't
deliver the news you lose--plain and simple. Beyond news,
Friedman says he is prepared to cut special deals to
book high profile, marquee guests...deals such as promising multiple
appearances, a kind of journalistic horse trading that the Today
Show recently renounced. So, you're ready to deal? I'm ready
to deal. And the Today Show says they're not going
to deal. They won't deal unless they're forced to. Maybe
they will, maybe they won't. Katie Couric says they won't.
I think deal making is very dangerous in this business.
Why? Because you can be held hostage by a movie
company, a publicist, an actor or actress, an author who
obviously wants maximum air time but it gets into the
editorial decision-making where it's inappropriate. You know, you're doing eight
parts on a movie that frankly ain't very good or
doesn't deserve that much national airtime. The Today Show displayed
its draw for top talent and willingness to pounce this
week, when it scooped up singer Mariah Carey. CBS had
planned to kick off The Early Show with a Carey
concert outside their studio on Fifth Avenue. When they failed
to get permits in time for Carey's deadline, she bolted
to the Today Show. There are going to be some
ferocious, behind the scenes battles for the top names. Beyond
the booking wars, there is the content of the show
itself. Will the hard news approach work for CBS? Author
Richard Hack has his doubts. The idea that CBS has
for The Early Show is to make it more edgy,
hard news type of broadcast. Bryant Gumbel works very well
in that type of format and of course CBS has
a lot of history doing that kind of show. Unfortunately,
nobody has remembered that it doesn't work. What happens with
that kind of program is that you get people to
tune in, they expect to see the Today Show, they
expect to see Good Morning America, what they get is
CNN. If they wanted CNN, they would tune in CNN.
But Bryant Gumbel thinks his prospects--and those of CBS--
have never been brighter. I'm going into this, obviously, expecting
to do well, and hoping to do well, but I'm
not going to slit my wrists, you know? Perhaps not.
But executives at CBS News--and the other cash strapped
news divisions--recognize that the morning time slot
is their best opportunity to build audiences and in the
process, prop up the bottom line. Finally tonight, the visit
of Nigeria's new leader to Washington. Ray Suarez has that
story. Early this year, for the first time in 15
years, Nigerians chose their president, and nearly 30 million citizens
cast ballots that ended 16 years of military rule in
the West African nation. Nigeria, about twice the size of
California, was once on the road to becoming a wealthy
nation. It's one of the world's top oil producers. But
for years, corrupt governments and businesses have been accused of
siphoning off much of the wealth. Most of Nigeria's 110
million people live in poverty. During military rule, political repression
in Nigeria drew intense criticism. And the 1995 hanging of
poet and human rights crusader Ken Saro-Wiwa and several others
brought international pressure to penalize Nigeria. International bodies voted to
sanction the country, but were largely ineffective. But after the
death of General Sani Abacha, the country's military rulers agreed
to an election. The winner was a former military ruler,
General Olusegun Obasanjo, now in traditional garb instead of army
green. Obasanjo served as president in the late 70's. He
voluntarily relinquished power in 1979 to a civilian government that
was later overthrown by the military. Obasanjo spent three years
in prison for criticizing military rule. Despite allegations of vote
fraud, international monitors called the elections fair. The mood was
festive when Obasanjo came forward to greet the nation. The
people of Nigeria have made their choice. I am humbled
by the fact that I, Olusegun Obasanjo, am that choice.
During his campaign, Obasanjo promised that his government would fight
the corruption that made millionaires out of military cronies, and
makes his country frightening to investors. President Clinton after yesterday's
talks with the new Nigerian leader, backed up his call
for increased aid, and some forgiveness of Nigeria's crushing debt.
President Obasanjo's election in May has signaled a new day
for Nigeria, and a new hope for Africa. It is
very much in America's interests that Nigeria succeed, and therefore
we should assist them in their success. We intend to
increase our assistance to Nigeria, to expand law enforcement cooperation
and to work toward an agreement to stimulate trade and
investment between us. We intend to do what we can
to help Nigeria recover assets plundered by the previous regime.
But we must do more to realize the promise of
this moment for Nigeria and for Africa. President Obasanjo says,
if he doesn't pass power to an elected civilian after
his term, he will have failed. During an interview this
morning he stressed his country's progress and America's interests in
Africa's success. In recent speeches you've talked about Nigeria as
being a potentially great country. Certainly it's always been a
potentially rich country. President Clinton yesterday talked about relieving some
of the debt burden of heavily indebted countries. But oil
prices are low right now. How can you sort of
get the engine of the economy going? Well, President Clinton
got it right when he said that taking the economic
and social indicators as they are today, Nigeria is potentially
a rich country but as of today is a poor
country. If you like, you may even say it's not
that poor a country because the riches are there in
its human resources. And natural resources are good--but it
is an impoverished country. As long as Nigeria has to
be at the bottom of the excessive debt that hangs
over its head now, so long will it not be
able to come out or to actualize its potential. So
what we are saying is that for Nigeria to actualize
its potential it needs a lifeline, and the lifeline is
to help us out of its burden of debt. One
of the popular slogans here in Washington when you talk
about Africa is "trade, not aid." Doesn't Nigeria need both?
Fact, Africa needs both. Before you can trade, you have
to be in a position to prepare what you, the
ware that will you trade in; and to prepare the
ware that will you trade in, you need to be
helped--and that is the initial aid--to be helped
in a position of skill, to be helped in education,
to be helped even in the simple thing of how
do you package what you want to trade in, the
product, how is it packaged? Where do you look for
market? How do you advertise? All these will need to
learn and in learning those--what I call the nuts
and bolts--you need assistance. That's where the aid comes
before trade; but yes, trade not aid. But I will
say a little bit of aid, which will then assist--
a little bit of aid, which will then assist trade.
Nigerian troops have been in several countries in West Africa
in recent years; the region has had many troubles. As
we watch your country move into a new era trying
to solve some of its own problems internally, could we
expect that Nigeria will look inward and be less involved
in its region? No, we won't look inward. I believe
that we have a responsibility beyond our borders for peace
and stability in our sub-region, indeed, in our region, and
that's the reason why we must be strong internally--politically
stable--strong--and economically vibrant and buoyant. Mr. President, in
recent decades Americans have become quite used to bad news--
a steady stream of bad news from Africa. But there's
much bright news, too: Two big democracies, Nigeria and South
Africa, new on the horizon; big regional powers in their
parts of the continent. How does that change what happens
in the other countries that are neighbors of you both?
Well, bad news. I think I will not want America
to be ignored so that they expect that there can
be no good news from any part of the world.
In fact, America must make effort to ensure that good
news comes from all parts of the world as much
as possible. But having said that, the situation in South
Africa and Nigeria must give great hope to the two
countries, citizens of the two countries, and to Africans generally,
and to the world in particular. Now that there is
an elected government in your country, are you more able
to reach out to other parts of the continent, to
be welcome in other places around the world, than perhaps
General Abacha had been and his government? Naturally. The international
community stood firm and supported Nigerians through a turning to
fight against tyranny and of oppression of military differences with
Abacha. And when that struggle was successfully reached, the international
community became more receptive to the new dispensation and the
new leadership in Nigeria. And we are grateful to them
for that and we are grateful to God, and we
are grateful to our own citizens who, out of sheer
determination, stood firm and said, "no," and no matter what
it cost them. And it cost some of our compatriots
their lives. It cost some of us our freedom. It
cost some other form of deprivation. But in the end,
the Nigerians won. When you yourself were in jail, many
of your country men and women were killed, many people
are poor. It must be difficult to ask for patience
when people have done without for a long time. They
know that even though they have no electricity, in many
places, running water, that ten or twenty miles away there
are people with laptop computers and Mercedes Benzes. How do
you keep them on the road and looking forward to
the future? Now, there is really nothing like hope. When
people have hope, they have almost, they can have anything,
and they can wait for anything. It's when there is
no hope that you are frustrated out of this world.
What has happened in Nigeria today is that the expectations
are high. People who have been deprived, people who have
been suppressed, they now have these freedoms. They breathe new
fresh air and they are seeing things that are happening,
and they can wait. If five months ago if you
had to queue for twenty-four hours at the petrol station
to get fuel, and today we don't have to do
that--we can drive in and drive out--that is
the feeling that is pervading the air in Nigeria today,
the feeling of high expectation and hope that--not futile
expectation and hope, but expectation that can see result, and
therefore is fruitful expectation. Well, Mr. President, I want to
thank you for giving us some of your time today.
Thank you very much. Again, the major stories of this
Friday: President Clinton proposed new rules to protect patients' privacy,
the first federal regulations designed to keep computerized medical records
confidential. And Russia rejected international calls for diplomacy and launched
a new wave of attacks in Chechnya. We'll see you
online, and again here Monday evening. Have a nice weekend.
I'm Jim Lehrer. Thank you, and good night.
