content
Good evening. I'm Jim Lehrer. On the NewsHour tonight: Our
summary of the news; then, a three-part look at the
escalating violence in Iraq--a report from Iraq by Jeffrey
Gettleman of the "New York Times," analysis of the Shiite
group and its leader that triggered some of the weekend
attacks, and reaction from Senate Foreign Relations Committee leaders, Senators
Lugar and Biden. We close with some thoughts about how
the steroids scandal is touching the new Major League Baseball
season. U.S.-Led forces struck back on several fronts against the
armed resistance in Iraq today. In Baghdad, U.S. Apache helicopters
fired into a Shiite Muslim neighborhood after receiving small-arms fire.
Troops stepped up patrols there and in another Shiite area,
where fierce fighting killed eight U.S. troops and at least
52 Iraqis this weekend. In all, 12 American troops were
killed in the last 24 hours. Also in Baghdad, U.S.
officials branded a radical Shiite cleric an "outlaw," and announced
a warrant for his arrest for the murder of a
rival cleric last year. Moqtada al-Sadr implored his followers to
stage the recent Shiite protests against the U.S. occupation. A
U.S. Military spokesman said al-Sadr's militia threatens the country's stability.
We will take action, as and when necessary, to maintain
a safe and secure environment in Iraq. Individuals who create
violence, who incite violence, who execute violence against persons inside
of Iraq will be hunted down and captured or killed.
It is that simple. In southern Iraq, Shiite protestors demanded
the release of al-Sadr's imprisoned supporters. British troops exchanged gunfire
with militiamen who seized the governor's office. And northwest of
Baghdad, hundreds of U.S. Marines and Iraqi troops launched operation
vigilant resolve in the city of Fallujah. They closed roads
and imposed a dusk-to-dawn curfew. U.S. commanders vowed to subdue
the city after insurgents and rioters killed and then mutilated
four American contractors there last week. President Bush said today
the United States would stick to a June 30 power
transfer in Iraq, despite the new violence. He told reporters
in North Carolina the U.S. had an obligation to do
so. The message to the Iraqi citizens is they don't
have to fear that America will turn and run. That's
an important message for them to hear. They think that
we're not sincere about staying the course. Many people will
not continue to take a risk toward, take the risk
toward freedom and democracy. The president said the U.S. would
maintain a very strong military presence in Iraq after the
handover. We'll have more on the Iraq violence story right
after this News Summary. Spanish authorities today announced two more
arrests in the Madrid train bombings. They were made Saturday,
the same day at least four other suspects blew themselves
up rather than surrender to police in Madrid. Three of
those killed have been linked to the bombings. The alleged
mastermind was among them. At least 16 people are being
held in the March 11 bombing that killed 191 people,
injured some 1,800. Secretary of State Powell was in Haiti
today. It was his first visit since former President Aristide
went into exile. Powell urged the country's new prime minister
to deny government posts to leaders of the rebellion that
put him in power, especially those with criminal records. Gerard
Latortue was appointed head of state after a week's-long popular
insurrection. He later hailed some rebel leaders as freedom fighters.
The sweeping power failure in eight states and Canada last
summer could happen again. That was the conclusion of a
final report issued today by a joint Canadian-American taskforce. It
blamed the power industry for failing to follow its voluntary
rules to ensure the reliable flow of electricity. And it
said power companies needed to have mandatory standards, and strong
enforcement of them. A flash flood killed at least 25
people in northern Mexico today. Rescue helicopters searched for 60
more missing residents in the border town of Piedras Negras,
150 miles southwest of San Antonio, Texas. Flooding in the
region began yesterday, when thunderstorms dumped up to two feet
of rain in parts of Mexico, Texas and New Mexico.
The Pulitzer Prizes for 2004 were announced today. In journalism,
the "Los Angeles Times" won in five categories, including for
its coverage of Southern California's wildfires last fall. The investigative
reporting prize went to "The Blade" of Toledo, Ohio, for
its investigative series on atrocities by the elite U.S. Army
unit, tiger force, during the Vietnam War. That series was
featured on the NewsHour last Friday. In the arts, the
biography winner was William Taubman for his book about Russian
leader Nikita Khrushchev. General nonfiction went to Anne Applebaum for
her history of the Soviet gulags. Edward P. Jones won
the fiction category for "The Known World," a novel about
slavery, Franz Wright, the poetry prize for "Walking to Martha's
Vineyard," Paul Moravec, the music prize for his "Tempest Fantasy,"
and for drama, Doug Wright for "I Am My Own
Wife." J.C. Penney sold its Eckerd drug store chain for
more than $4.5 billion today. The U.S.-based CVS Corporation and
a Canadian partner bought the chain of 2,800 Eckerd outlets
in 23 states. The deal makes CVS the largest drug
chain in the United States, with 5,000 stores. Bank of
America will cut 12,500 jobs, or 7 percent, of its
workforce. The announcement today follows completion of the bank's merger
with the Fleet Boston Financial Corporation. The bank said it
was trimming overlapping processes to save $650 million. It promised
customers no reduction in services. On Wall Street today, the
Dow Jones Industrial Average gained more than 87 points to
close at 10,558. The NASDAQ rose nearly 22 points to
close at 2079. That's it for the News Summary tonight.
Now it's on to our three-part look at the violence
in Iraq, and the opening of baseball's steroids season. The
new turmoil in Iraq. Part one: From on the ground,
and to Margaret Warner. The violence that killed eight American
soldiers and wounded more than three dozen yesterday, began with
Shiite protests in several Iraqi cities. The protests turned particularly
violent in the holy city of Najaf, and in Baghdad.
The fiercest fighting was in Baghdad's largest Shiite neighborhood, known
as Sadr City. It was there that the eight American
soldiers were killed. Overall, about 50 Iraqis were killed and
some 170 others wounded. The demonstrations throughout the country were
spearheaded by militant followers of a 31-year-old radical Islamic cleric,
Moqtada al-Sadr. Yesterday's clashes followed protests last week over the
coalition's decision to shut down al-Sadr's newspaper, and the Saturday
arrest of a top al-Sadr aide for alleged involvement in
the murder of a rival cleric last year. Today, the
U.S. Administrator in Iraq, Paul Bremer, declared al-Sadr an outlaw.
He is effectively attempting to establish his authority in place
of the legitimate authority of the Iraqi government and the
coalition. And as I said yesterday, we will not tolerate
this. We will reassert the law and order which the
Iraqi people expect of the coalition and the Iraqi forces.
Coalition authorities also disclosed today that an Iraqi judge had
issued an arrest warrant for al-Sadr several months ago in
connection with the rival cleric's murder. Brigadier General Mark Kimmitt
said the violence incited by al-Sadr's militia, the Amahdi army,
and other militias would not be tolerated. Militias are inconsistent
with a democratic and sovereign nation with a central government.
And we will take action, as and when necessary, to
maintain a safe and secure environment in Iraq. Individuals who
create violence, who incite violence, who execute violence against persons
inside of Iraq will be hunted down and captured or
killed. It is that simple. Despite a show of force
by coalition troops, new Shiite protests led by members of
al-Sadr's Amahdi militia erupted today in several Iraqi cities. And
for the latest developments inside Iraq, we're joined from Baghdad
by Jeffrey Gettleman of the "New York Times." Jeffrey, welcome.
I gather you've been in a lot of these hot
spots today. Give us a feeling for what it's like
on the ground. Sure. Today I went to two places.
I went to Fallujah in western Iraq, where right now
the marines are dealing with an insurgency by Sunni Muslims.
There was this horrible incident last week, where four people
were killed, four American civilians were killed in the center
of Fallujah, and their bodies were dragged through the streets.
And today, the marines began to surround the city and
plan a siege to find the people who were responsible
for this attack, and try to restore some order in
Fallujah. I did that today. And I also went to
a city called Kufa in the South, which has been
racked by violence where militiamen loyal to a Shia cleric
have taken over the town, kicked off the Iraqi police,
and established their own occupation-free zone in the area where
there's no coalition or occupation authorities, no Iraqi police, only
these members of this militia who wear all black, carry
machine guns and sort of rule the town as it
is right now. And are they very much in evidence?
Yeah, they are. They're all over the place. I mean,
what's going on is this one cleric, Moqtada al-Sadr, is
in a mosque right now, and he's refusing to come
out. The coalition authorities have issued an arrest warrant for
him because they say he's been behind this recent upsurgence
in violence, and also that he had played a part
in an assassination attempt or an assassination last year. So
his followers have surrounded his mosque. They have a lot
of guns, RPG's, which are rocket-propelled grenades, and they say
that they're preparing for a siege by American forces when
they come to take this cleric, Moqtada al-Sadr. Tell us
a little more about yesterday. I mean, was al-Sadr able
to just give the word and suddenly all these protests
erupted in all these different cities? Yesterday was really scary.
It was the first time since I've been here--I've
been here about three months--that there were really signs
that things were slipping out of control. The day began
with massive demonstrations in many cities across Iraq, in Baghdad,
in Najaf, Basra and a few other places. And they
were organized by this cleric, al-Sadr, who is protesting two
things, basically. One is the Americans shut down his newspaper
last week. He publishes a weekly newspaper, the American authorities
had accused it of printing lies that incited violence, and
so they took action last week and closed the newspaper.
That began the series of protests starting last week, that
sort of built to through this past week. The second
event was the arrest of one of al-Sadr's aides, who
supposedly was linked to an assassination of a rival cleric
last year. So there was a lot of energy in
the street. This cleric, al-Sadr, was calling for his followers
to protest these two things. Meanwhile, many of them are
armed. And as the day went on yesterday, things got
out of control. It started with stones being tossed in
a few places, then there were gunshots, and then just
sort of all-out mayhem erupted both here in Baghdad and
in a few other places. How seriously have the U.S.
forces and U.S. officials that you've talked to taken al-Sadr
up till now, in terms of whether he has a
big enough following, how powerful this militia of his is?
I think the U.S. authorities have been watching him, as
evidenced by shutting down his newspaper last week. They said
that was a very difficult decision because they anticipated that
it would provoke many of his followers to demonstrate in
the streets, but they were very worried that if he
continued to print this newspaper that contained lies according to
the coalition. One example was that al-Sadr had accused the
coalition of planning a suicide bombing or an attack against
the police station that everybody else here in Iraq had
basically thought was a suicide bombing. But they thought that
if this paper continued it could really cause a problem.
So they had been watching him, but I think more
of the focus been on another Shiite cleric, Ayatollah Sistani,
who is a much older man, he lives in Najaf,
he issues these religious decrees. And Sistani was playing a
much more active role in the governance of Iraq. So
while there was a lot of focus on Sistani, Sadr
was able to sort of create a following, build a
militia, and yesterday we saw the results of that. Now,
what do coalition officials say about, or how do they
explain the fact that this arrest warrant apparently, which was
disclosed today was issued for him months ago, but they've
never arrested him? You know, they really didn't address that
question. It came up, but there was no clear answer
why if the arrest warrant had been issued months ago
it was just coming out today, one day after al-Sadr
had provoked what proved to be the greatest insurrection since
occupation began. And U.S. officials--and we've run some of
this tape--had some very tough talk about how they
plan to crack down on these militias, they're not going
to tolerate them. Anybody who is involved will be put
out of business, and so on. What is their plan,
really, for cracking down on all of these? It's really
not clear. And like my visit to Kufa today showed,
it's going to be a serious challenge. I mean, the
town of Kufa, it's a small town along the banks
of the Euphrates River, it's actually quite pretty, the river
runs right through it, there are these palm trees lining
each side, and there's this beautiful mosque in the middle.
That's where al-Sadr is holed up right now. But he
has the place so surrounded with his followers, who are
so loyal to him, and almost fanatical. You see them
marching through the streets with these huge posters of al-Sadr,
chanting his name. They all say that they'll die for
him, and they've really dug in. So to uproot a
militia like that, it's going to be mayhem. And there's
a lot of people in Kufa today that I talked
to that are sort of dreading what may happen if
the U.S. troops come down there, or any troops come
down there to try to take him out because they're
so entrenched right now and the support for him is
so loyal right there, that it's hard to imagine how
this is going to be resolved without some serious fighting.
And do U.S. Officials or coalition officials you talked to
say they think they've got enough troops to handle all
of this? Well, that's one of those questions that keeps
coming up, and we keep getting the same answer. And
that is yes, we do have enough troops to handle
this. But part of that explanation was based on reassurances
given by American authorities that the Iraqi police forces and
security forces were ready to take on some of the
day-to-day security. But what was really frightening about yesterday was
that the Iraqi forces just collapsed, and Sadr City, where
there was serious fighting going on, the Iraqi police fled
and the Americans had to come in and battle these
forces loyal to Sadr to get them out of the
police stations they seized. In Kufa, there wasn't even a
battle. As soon as the armed militia arrived at the
doorsteps of the police station, the police left. So that
seems to raise the question of how ready are the
Iraqis right now to provide for their own security if
there is a handover and the American forces play more
of a secondary role. Jeffrey Gettleman, thanks so much. Thank
you. Now, part two: More on the Shia leader, and
to Gwen Ifill, For more about the latest Shiite uprising,
and what it means for the continuing occupation, we turn
to Samer Shehata, a visiting assistant professor of Middle East
politics at the Center for Contemporary Arab Studies at Georgetown
University; and Adeed Dawisha, professor of political science at Miami
University of Ohio--he's written extensively on the politics of
the Middle East. Professor Shehata, we've heard about the general
reluctance of the Shia population to this occupation and to
the legal steps which are being put in place to,
for the handover on June 30. What do we see
over the weekend with this new uprising that tells us
what effect that will have on the prospects for the
handover? Well, what we've seen is a Shia leader who
has been the most vehement in his criticism of the
occupation in his calling into question the legitimacy of the
Iraqi governing council, someone who's been excluded from the political
process--not easily willing to go way or to succumb
to the rule of the coalition provisional authority. It's not
clear how powerful Sadr is, it's not clear how many
people are in his militia as it were. But these
are the types of difficulties that the CPA is going
to face in the future because this isn't the only
militia, it's not the only Islamist based militia either. He
is 30 years old, relatively new to any positions of
leadership. But is he someone that the United States or
the coalition provisional authority has been taking seriously? Not really.
He is young, there's no question about that, and he's
also politically inexperienced, which is not a very good combination.
But he comes from a long lineage of Shia clerics
who have a significant amount of standing in Iraq. His
father was of course killed by Saddam Hussein or Saddam
Hussein's agents, as well as two of Sadr's brothers. His
father was also in prison for some time and has
established a charitable network of welfare, education and other organizations
that have real resonance in the kind of disenfranchised Shia
community of Baghdad and beyond. But the United States has
not been taking Sadr very seriously. Adeed Dawisha, should they
have been taking him seriously? Well, it depends on what
you mean by taking him seriously. They've been eying him
very closely, and last fall, for example, when some of
his people ambushed an American group and killed two or
three Americans, the CPA actually went in and threatened him
with imprisonment, and as a result of that in fact
you find that for about September, October, up until very
recently about a month ago his rhetoric had been toned
down considerably. It's only in the last two or three
weeks that he's kind of upped the ante again and
began calling for violence against the Americans and insurrection, and
that's when the Americans began to do something about it,
or at least in a sense it began with closing
down his newspaper, and imprisoning his main lieutenant. Why the
suddenly stepped up rhetoric? What was it that triggered that
which led to this? You know, it's very difficult to
know why. I think that a lot of these groups,
including his are now jockeying for power in anticipation of
the transfer of power that the CPA is going to
be doing, and in June. It also probably is a
result of what's been happening in Fallujah, which has been
creating an image of the Americans as being somewhat weak,
unable to quell the insurrection in a town like Fallujah,
and with these people, especially the--Sadr and his group,
any sign of weakness is immediately pounced upon. So I
think that the events of the last month or so
have had a major impact on the change in strategy
of Sadr. And Professor Shehata, the events of the last
month or so have been all centered in the Sunni
Triangle--the only concerns about the Shia population had been
revolving around Ayatollah al-Sistani, who is obviously, what is his
relationship to al-Sadr, if any? Well, it's not a very
good one, it's a rival relationship really, over influence on
the Shia majority in Iraq. Although publicly, Sistani has not
said anything negatively against Sadr, Sadr has criticized al-Sistani and
other religious leaders in Iraq who have been willing to
engage in some kind of negotiations as it were with
the coalition provisional authority and the Americans. So they can
be seen as rival religious leaders, vying for the allegiance
of Iraq's Shia population. But rival on the same level?
Not at all, not on the same level. Sistani is
revered, he is a man of religious learning, a scholar,
he's reclusive; he's not somebody who has dirtied his hands
in the day-to-day politics of Iraq. Moqtada al-Sadr is the
opposite, he's young and inexperienced he has not had that
much religious learning whatsoever. And his main appeal is his
fiery anti-American, anti-occupation, nationalism really, a Shia nationalism that appeals
to the most disenfranchised elements of the population. Professor Dawisha,
Professor Shehata said he's not certain how many people that
Mr. Al-Sadr actually controls. Do you have a sense of
that, of who he's actually speaking to and whether it's
potent? Well, I agree that his main support comes from
the disenfranchised section of the Shiite community in Iraq, that's
why you find the demonstrations for example in Baghdad coming
out of Sadr City, which used to be called Saddam
City, which is the worst slums in Iraq--in Baghdad.
Now on the other side of the city, there is
an area which is also heavily Shiite, but this is
the area of middle class merchants, professionals and so on,
and so far nothing has come out of that area.
That tells you something about the kind of support he
has. In terms of militia, he controls, a militia called
a Mahdi army which is probably about 10,000 men. These
are all a bunch of, to be quite honest and
to say it plainly, a bunch of thugs who go
around these southern cities terrorizing women for not wearing the
right clothes, terrorizing professors who are probably secular; in fact
last week this Mahdi army went into a small village,
which is inhabited by gypsies and because the gypsies in
Iraq tend to kind of dance and sing, this village
was entirely raised to the ground, and it's inhabitants of
about a thousand or fifteen hundred were either killed or
tortured. This is the kind of group that this man
is presiding over. And this is why I think the
CPA has finally decided to take him on. Professor Shehata
if there are 10,000 of them and they are thugs
and they are organized thugs, what is it that the
coalition provisional authority ought to be doing or the United
States forces ought to be doing to silence them? Well,
this is the crucial question, because Moqtada al-Sadr might not
be a problem, but how the U.S. deals with him
and his militia is a crucial issue. I think that
dealing with them as they have over the last couple
of days with Apache helicopter gun ships, tanks and so
on, my not be the best way to do that,
because Moqtada al-Sadr could become a martyr. This could embitter
a much larger segment of the Iraqi population against the
United States. So I think that's really the key question.
And it's not clear at all why this arrest warrant
was issued right now if it-or why they're trying
to arrest him right now, if the arrest warrant was
issued sometime ago. So I think probably what's in the
CPA's minds is this June 30 deadline and the desire
to get rid of someone like Moqtada al-Sadr and the
possible danger that he poses before the symbolic handover of
power to a sovereign Iraqi authority. Professor Dawisha, your thoughts
on that, exactly what should the coalition provisional authority be
doing if anything if he is that serious a threat?
I think the CPA at the moment is walking a
very tight rope, and I hope they will come to
the right conclusions about what to do. On the one
hand, the kind of people al-Sadr leads and he himself,
they're not the kind of people who in a sense
understand compromise. Any compromise on the part of the CPA
is seen as a sign of weakness and will only
engender even more violence on their part. On the other
hand, if, I agree wholeheartedly with Professor Shehata, if you
make al-Sadr into a martyr, then whatever support he has
might overspill into the larger Shiite community, and then if
we're going to have--the a large segment of the
Shiite community against us as well as the Sunni Triangle,
then we are having a major problem on our hands.
So we need to use--sorry. But in your opinion,
should he be removed, is he a serious enough threat
or can he just be set to the side and
ignored? I think if we can remove him while at
the same time appealing to the grand ayatollah's Sistani--the
people who have a lot of influence amongst the larger
Shiite community, if we can bring them in and don't
forget these people detest Moqtada al-Sadr; they would be very
happy to see him go. If we can do this
kind of stick and carrot policy, then we might get
away with it. But if we just leave him untouched,
then he's just going to continue, because he's going to
see this as a sign of weakness on our part
and that's something which he plays on. Adeed Dawisha and
Samer Shehata, thank you for joining us. And now, part
three of our Iraq violence focus with the two leaders
of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee: The chairman, Richard Lugar,
Republican of Indiana; and the ranking Democrat Joe Biden of
Delaware. Senator Lugar, the president today rejected delaying the June
or considering delaying the June 30 deadline for turning over
sovereignty to Iraq. Do you agree with him? Well, I
was asked a question yesterday by a reporter about the
30th deadline and it appeared to me that this might
be a subject for more study and more debate. And
certainly the program you've had this evening illustrates some of
the reasons why, namely the timeframe is very small to
disarm the militia, to bring about a security situation in
which the governing council, the 24 Iraqis or however many
others they appoint, can govern the country. And furthermore, I
added that over here on the Senate, at some point
we hope to see a nominee for ambassador of the
country, a very important appointment, and have the confirmation process,
learn more about the 3,000 Americans who may be going
to the largest embassy we've ever had before the 30th
of June and try to figure out the security for
those Americans quite apart from those folks who are out
there now: Humanitarian people, construction Americans, trying to help the
Iraqis rebuild their country. But Senator, it was your statement
that caused the president to be asked this very question
today. Yes. Do you interpret his answer as saying no
way, Senator Lugar? That's my impression. That the president gave
that answer, that June 30 is it, is the deadline.
Now if this be the case, then I'm very hopeful
that whoever is doing the planning for the next few
days as we count down to June 30, will come
forward, at least to some of us in the Congress,
I think that they probably in the administration will need
some of our assistance in a time in which the
Congress has been polarized, is fractious, as the president and
others have observed. We're going to need at least some
idea, which we used to get daily when the war
was going on, the hostilities in Iraq. But now whole
weeks pass without any sign really of how things are
proceeding. So we're going to have hearings in the Foreign
Relations Committee on the 20th, the 21st and 22nd of
this month, we are going to probe anybody who will
tell us what ought to occur in Iraq, or what
is occurring. Senator Biden, how do you read the president's
statement today, same way Senator Lugar does? The exact same
way Senator Lugar does, and quite frankly I think whether
or not we go forward on June 30 is actually
less important than whether we have a plan for success.
I don't know what the administration's plan is. I don't
know what the plan is as when Bremer says wheels
up on June 30, what happens then, to whom are
we turning over sovereignty, number one. Number two, who is
going to be the referee, there's no doubt there's going
to be some degree of chaos between June 30 and
the time general elections are to be held at the
end of January. Who is going to be the one
that lets, if in fact Chalabi makes a deal with
Sistani on diminishing the role of women in Iraq, for
example, who is going to démarche them just like we
did in Afghanistan when they-when the Loyah Jirga were
putting together their constitution and they diverted in a significant
way? I just don't know what the plan is, and
it is absolutely incredible to me that here we are
about twelve weeks out, neither the chairman of the Foreign
Relations Committee nor the ranking member, not that we're so
important, but institutionally we in a sense are, at least
I don't have any idea what their plan is. What
about the president's point today, Senator Biden, that the U.S.
has an obligation to the Iraqi people to keep its
word? The word was we're going to turn it over
on June 30. Yes, there's some security problems, yes the
U.S. is going to have to keep troops there. The
answer is there's some truth to that. The president for
whatever reason picking June 30 has raised expectations considerably. And
there's two concerns about not being able to turn power
over at that time: One would be that we have
reneged on our word to the Iraqi populace at large.
But the second is that is Sadr and his thugs
or the Sunni Triangle folks in Fallujah conclude that their
activity can alter our course of action--that they are
succeeding. So I acknowledge that there is a real concern.
There is still time to do this the right way,
in my view. But I just am at a loss
to be able to understand why there hasn't been a
resolution within the administration as to whether or not they're
going to go back for another U.N. resolution, whether or
not they're going to try to get a Brahimi-like figure
in--. The U.N. special--The U.N. special envoy, essentially a
high commissioner. In other words, I just don't know what
they have in mind. And as Dick said, during the
war, prior to the war they consulted with us regularly.
As if, and they're acting now like as if there's
no need to consult us, as if they don't need
congressional support. And I think it's less important that they
satisfy Dick and me than they satisfy the American people.
And I think the American people are beginning to wonder
whether they have a plan for success. Do you agree
with that, Senator Lugar, the American people are wondering what's
going on over there? Yes, they are wondering and we
need to offer answers. We meaning the entire U.S. Government,
you all included as well as the president? That's right-
the president and Congress. And we need to see it
together, so that it is even more credible. I would
just add to what Joe Biden has said that clearly
if I were a member of the governing council of
24 and sovereignty was passed to me, sometimes it's said
symbolically, but the Iraqis believe it's actually, and at that
point the Iraqis have virtually no army, the police forces
are very small and some are being trained as we've
just heard, they flee when there is conflict in the
cities of Iraq. If I were a member of that
governing council I would wonder how do I plan to
govern? The old idea is not to worry, the United
States will be there. But then the idea that we're
going to have an agreement with this new government prior
to June 30 has been put aside, and people have
said in Iraq, you can't do that prior to our
taking sovereignty. Then we'll make an arrangement with the United
States for the troops. This is an entirely unsatisfactory, watching
what we have been watching in the last few days.
Back to the rock and the hard place issue that
Senator Biden raised, that if the United States for whatever
reason does not meet its obligation or meet its promise
on June 30, then the al-Sadrs and the other thugs
in Iraq will have won. Is that a problem in
and of itself? Of course it's a problem. And I
would just say that talking about the June 30 deadline
is a difficult issue because of the promise that June
30 is it. But once again the Iraqi governing council
is the group that is to receive the sovereignty, they're
the group that supposedly will work out the road map
of how they get a constitution, how they have executive
persons there, how finally the elections might be held. And
in order to do any of that, they're going to
have to have some security around themselves. We're going to
transfer authority essentially from the Pentagon to the State Department
on June 30. Jerry Bremer leaves and an ambassador still
to be named and confirmed and all the people to
come in. This is a huge change in a very
insecure situation. And all I'm saying is that we do
need a road map of our own, that is the
congress, the American people, to follow what kind of sacrifice,
what kind of money, extra troops if that is required,
or whatever, so that we are successful. Senator Biden, extra
troops, that issue came up today in a joint press
availability in Baghdad with Paul Bremer, and they said that
no extra troops were needed, but always looking at that
as an issue. What do you think, where do you
come down on that? It's a very unpopular position I'm
taking, I've been taking it for the last five months,
we don't have enough troops there. The idea that you
hear Bremer and others and they're good people say that
we've trained up 200,000 Iraqi security forces from their civil
guard to their police to their army is absolutely preposterous.
When Dick Lugar and I were there over a year
ago almost now, we met with all our trainers, they
say it's going to take at least three years to
train up an Iraqi police force, it's going to take
that long or longer to train an Iraqi army. The
truth of the matter is there is no security but
U.S. security, a few Brits, a few Spaniards and a
few Poles. It is the United States of America. And
that's not going to change on June 30, right? It's
not going to change, it just going to get worse,
so we are the game, we are the totality of
the security. And it seems to me we're not leveling
with the American people here. This can be done, but
remember, we made the announcement as far back as late
November of last year to June 30 was the date.
Here we are, in April, and they still haven't resolved
the dispute in the administration between the State Department and
the vice president's office or who ever else is arguing
about this as to what is the plan. Senator Lugar,
is that the problem here, that the administration can't get
its own disagreements sorted out? I don't know; I frankly
don't know. I've asked this quietly, for a while, without
having any resolution of it. So as I've mentioned to
you publicly-we're going to raise these in a couple
of weeks and hopefully in that period of time the
administration will have plans that it can give to the
public and to us and then we can then move
more confidently. Do you agree with Senator Biden, he said
it twice now, that it can be done probably by
June 30? Yes, I think we need to focus on
success. The purpose of the conversation of Joe Biden and
Dick Lugar on these issues is that we have been
stalwarts in a bipartisan way for the president throughout this
entire period of time. We're not harping critics, attempting to
cause difficulty either publicly or privately. We want success, the
president wants success. We're going to have to begin to
pull together and talk to each other, and the American
people need to hear that conversation. Senator Biden, have you
made efforts to tell the people in the administration what
you all have just been saying here tonight? Absolutely I
have. As a matter of fact--. Who do you talk
to? Well, to Dr. Rice, I talked to the secretary
of state, and deputy secretary. But they're very empathetic and
sympathetic. I've tried to talk to the president. I came
back from a long meeting with President Chirac, meeting with
the heads of all our NATO allies, the so-called permanent
representatives in Brussels, I came back and I said this
is what, and I wrote a report, I asked for
five minutes to be able to see the president, he
was not able to see me. In the past, on
the run up to the war, Dick Lugar and I
and right after the war were in his office frequently.
I don't often ask to see the president of the
United States, it's not that I'm so important, I wanted
a report to the president on what was being said
in Europe, what possibilities existed in my view, so we
heard another point of view. And he wrote me a
very nice handwritten letter saying Condi will be in touch.
She called me and said I got your memo, got
your note, thank you very much. So now maybe you're
talking to somebody, Jim, look, Jim, if they have, if
there isn't a division within the administration, about what the
plan should be, then that means there is a plan
and they're not telling us. Why? I don't get it.
I mean, I truly do not get this. So, Senator
Lugar, same question. Have you been trying very hard also
to say the same thing and who have you been
talking to? Because it's unusual, both of you have said
it several times now, hey, you were definitely in the
loop up until recently, why are you no longer in
the loop, have you asked people that question? No, I've
not asked. My own supposition is essentially that there is
indecision right now as to the questions that we're raising
would be answered. And probably at least some inner circle
talk within the administration that they're not prepared really to
share, and as far as their concerned, essentially they would
say the administration is running this war or running the
peace, we are interesting people and in due course if
we can be brought together in some sort of alliance
that would be useful, but for the moment not a
priority. All right. Senators both, thank you very much. And
finally tonight, baseball begins a new season facing some tough
questions. Terence Smith has that. Into left center field. He's
going to...Baseball's new season got under way at ballparks
across the country today, with many fans and players braving
cold and windy weather. President Bush told reporters he had
a strategy for the ceremonial first pitch. I'm going straight
fastball today. Try to get a little hop on it.
And then later in St. Louis, he put his arm
to the test, and opened the Cardinals' season. This year,
the cloud of steroid use looms large over baseball. Last
season, nearly 1,200 ballplayers underwent anonymous, penalty-free testing for steroids
as part of the league's new drug policy. Between 5%
and 7% came back positive--enough to staff about three
teams. Baseball's drug policy is less stringent than other sports.
While a player can be fined and even temporarily suspended,
no player can be suspended for a full season until
his fifth offense. One San Francisco lab, Balco, is under
heavy scrutiny for its alleged role in a scheme to
distribute illegal steroids to professional athletes. Four people were indicted
by a federal grand jury, including Balco's founder and the
personal trainer to home run champion Barry Bonds. During the
offseason, President Bush raised the issue in his state of
the union address. And at a hearing in Washington last
month, Republican Senator John McCain put the pressure on Major
League players and owners to change their ways. Your failure
to commit to addressing this issue straight on, and immediately,
will motivate this committee to search for legislative remedies. I
don't know what they are, but I can tell you
and your players that you represent the status quo is
not acceptable. For his part, baseball commissioner Bud Selig has
acknowledged the problem in recent weeks, including yesterday on ABC's
"This Week." We need, in my opinion, is random testing
year round. We also need stiffer penalties. We need a
program, as I said earlier, like the one that's in
the minor leagues because that will forever remove the cloud.
George, this is not only a health issue. There's no
question about that. But it's also it's an integrity issue.
There's a whole series of things that we really have
to deal with. The players union has resisted calls for
random drug testing, citing concerns over the players' privacy. For
more, I'm joined by Buster Olney, a senior writer at
"ESPN," the magazine, and a longtime baseball beat reporter. Buster
Olney, welcome. Tell us, as this season opens, just how
widespread a problem is this? I mean, we mentioned those
tests last year that suggested five to seven percent. Is
that the dimension or is it in fact larger? I
think players think it's much larger than that. The five
to seven percent that tested positive last year, those were
tests that players could reasonably predict when they were going
to take place. I think when you talk to players
privately they think it's probably about a third of the
players, a couple years ago were taking it and maybe
half of those because they're feeling pressure to keep up
with their competitors. What does that do to baseball, if
that's the case, then it really is very widespread and
as Commissioner Selig said, it's on one hand a health
issue and on the other hand an integrity of the
game issue. What does that do to baseball? It really
puts it in a bind. They just, because the labor
agreement is only two years old, and this is only
the second year of testing, they're kind of locked into
the current program unless the union leadership changes its stance,
and I don't know if that's going to happen. The
players internally within the union, I think, the vast majority
of them want a more stronger testing program, but the
union leadership I don't think wants to give away this
issue when they're not in a situation where they're negotiating
a new contract with the owners. Well, break that down
for us. You say the players want it. But the
union is resisting it or treats it as a negotiating
bargaining chip. That seems almost contradictory. Well, a couple years
ago U.S.A. Today did a poll of players and they
polled about 550 of 750 players, and 79% of the
players in a private poll said that they preferred a
strong testing system. I think most of the players look
at steroid users as a threat to the others, competitively,
financially, because they're taking jobs away from players who are
not using it, and they don't know what the risks
are healthwise. And they're I think a little worried about
if I use this stuff what's going to happen to
me in ten years, as one player said to me
this spring, I have to wonder if I'm going to
be able to see my children go through their weddings.
That's a difficult situation for the players. On the other
hand, the union leadership has always taken the public stance
that this is a privacy issue for the players, they
don't want players to have to submit to random drug
tests, not only for steroids, but for other drugs. They
feel like that's an infringement upon the players. But I
also think that because they are not currently negotiating a
contract, this is an issue they don't want to give
away for free. You mentioned you were at spring training,
and I wonder what you heard there, whether players talked
about possibly using steroids and now getting off it? Did
you see any evidence of that? There is, there are
a lot of executive scouts you talk to and looking
at the players because this is the first year where
a player can be suspended for steroid use, the bodies
are definitely smaller, were definitely smaller around spring training, you
look around baseball, you can see the effect that the
testing is having on it. The question is whether or
not because they're not strong penalties, is this going to
be a lasting effect. Most of the players don't think
so. The players who want stronger testing think the current
system is a joke. You basically, since the beginning of
last year, you could have stood in the middle of
the clubhouse, taken steroids in front of every reporter, every
teammate four times and before you were actually subject to
suspension. Right, and it wasn't actually grounds for that sort
of action at that point. What about the owners? When
you talk to them, when you interview them, what level
of concern and if they reflect Commissioner Selig's opinion that
there ought to be widespread random testing and a real
program here, why does it happen? Well, one of the
owners said to me last year that baseball moves like
a dreadnought. It takes a very long time to change
direction. There are a lot of indications in the mid-nineties
when you looked at how bodies were changing that steroids
was becoming a growing problem in baseball, and yet it
really hasn't been until the last couple years in which
the owners stepped in to address the problem and not
until the last few weeks when the owners have been
particularly loud about addressing this issue. My own feeling is
that Commissioner Selig, he knows which way the wind is
blowing on this, and he knows essentially it's a situation
where the union is going to have to address this
before he can. Meanwhile of course we're getting records broken
year after year: Home run records, pitching is stronger and
more frequent. I wonder what you think of that as
a development and whether you attribute it to steroid use
on the first level, and secondly, if so, whether the
whole era, the steroid era if you want to call
it that, needs to have an asterisk attached to it.
Well, I don't think you can attach something like that
to the era simply because you can't prove whether or
not a player used it. I have no doubt that
steroids have had a huge impact, and not only on
the hitters. There's an assumption that because hitters can gain
a tangible result getting stronger that they are the ones
who use it. A lot of pitchers are using this
stuff. I presume by looking at the bodies and from
talking with the players. It's because they can in taking
steroids they can bounce back from pitching in a game
much more quickly if they use the steroids. And you
look around at some of the pitchers who have been
very successful in recent years, and there's a lot of
suspicion about whether or not they use steroids. It has
been a huge factor in baseball, again, since the mid-nineties.
And you as someone who watches baseball all the time
and is up close to the players, you can actually
physically see the difference, you can see that they're more
muscular, more built up, as a result of what you
assume is steroid use? No question. And suddenly the bodies
look like they have helium in them, the upper bodies,
the foreheads squared off, you hear stories about how players
capsizes are changing after they turn 30 years old. I
walked up to a player last spring, and I could
not believe the difference in him physically, and I thought
he was embarrassed. He would never acknowledge to me that
he used steroids, but you could see it in his
eye, he was in a position where he felt like
he needed to take this to keep up with other
players who were using and it was unbelievable to see
the difference in his arms, shoulders and in his forehead.
One of the older players who hold those records, the
Hall of Famers, when you talk to them, what do
they say about this? I think there's a quiet resentment,
and more players, more Hall of Fame players, more star
players are speaking out on this. Jim Palmer spoke out
on it, was the Hall of Fame pitcher for the
Baltimore Orioles, talked about it a couple weeks ago, just
yesterday Cecil Fielder, who became the first player in about
50 years to hit 50 home runs, he basically suggested,
he mentioned by name players who he thought were taking
steroids. They feel like that their records, their accomplishments have
lost the context that they should have because the numbers
are being put up by suspected steroid users. Clearly a
lot of people think it needs more looking into. Buster
Olney, thank you very much. Thank you. Again, the major
developments of the day. U.S.-led forces struck back against the
armed resistance by Shiite militias in Iraq. And President Bush
said the June 30 transfer of power in Iraq would
stick, despite the violence. And again, to our honor roll
of American service personnel killed in Iraq. We add them
as their deaths are made official and photographs become available.
Here, in silence, are 11 more. We'll see you online,
and again here tomorrow evening. I'm Jim Lehrer. Thank you
and good night.
