content
Good evening. These were the top headline stories today. President
Reagan considered ways to increase the pressure on the captors
of 40 American hostages, including a blockade of Lebanon. Syria
and Israel offered to help in the crisis. House and
Senate negotiators gave up efforts to reach a compromise agreement
on a budget to reduce the deficit. An Oklahoma fireworks
plant exploded, killing at least 21. Jim? The NewsHour tonight
is the news of the day, two focus segments and
a newsmaker interview. Focus one, President Reagan's options against Lebanon,
first with Senate Foreign Relations Committee chairman Richard Lugar, then
with Jesse Jackson, former Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld and former
State Department official Joseph Sisco. Focus two, the falling out
of House and Senate conferees over the budget, with two
of the principal players, Congressman William Gray and Senator William
Armstrong. The newsmaker interview is with Senator Robert Packwood, chairman
of the Senate Finance Committee and a key man in
the move for tax reform. President Reagan has decided to let
diplomacy work a while longer to free the 40 American
hostages in Beirut. White House spokesman Larry Speakes said late
today the President is considering several concrete options, but decided
to hold back to see if diplomatic efforts will work.
Speakes said the options include shutting down the flow of
goods and services into Lebanon through boycotts and other economic
measures, and closing down Beirut airport to all traffic. Both
of these steps, he said, would require cooperation of other
countries; the point of it all would be to put
pressure on the Shiite Moslems to release the hostages. Mr.
Reagan met today with his top diplomatic, military and intelligence
advisers, including Secretary of State Shultz and Defense Secretary Weinberger.
Robin? There were these other developments in the hostage crisis
today. White House spokesman Speakes said Syria had agreed to
help, but Washington had seen no evidence of it. Israel's
Prime Minister Shimon Peres sent a letter to President Reagan
pledging full cooperation. Previously Israel has expressed sympathy, but said
the situation is an American affair. United Nations Secretary-General Javier
Perez de Cuellar issued a statement calling for the early
release of the 735 Lebanese prisoners still held by Israel.
The International Red Cross says it was visiting all 40
hostages today in Beirut. We will take a long look
at the hostage situation in our lead focus segment tonight.
In El Salvador today there was a follow-up to last
week's killing of four U.S. Marines. A leftist guerrilla group
said the raid was only the beginning of a war
against American servicemen in El Salvador. The off-duty Marines had
been assigned to the U.S. Embassy in San Salvador. They
were shot while eating at an outdoor cafe. House and
Senate conferees today gave up for the time being their
efforts to find a compromise budget to cut the federal
deficit. They were unable to reconcile differences between the Republican
Senate budget plan, which cuts Social Security cost-of-living increases, and
the Democratic House plan, which leaves the COLAs intact, but
makes deeper cuts in defense. The impasse was described by
Senate Budget Committee chairman Pete Domenici. I have concluded that
no good purpose can be served in continuing this conference
at this time. Knowing full well the importance of a
major deficit reduction package, I have, nonetheless, concluded that we
should no longer proceed. I don't want this to be
interpreted in any way that the House conferees, and in
particular the distinguished chairman of the House conference, have not
tried their very best. It's just one of those situation
where now that, consistent with the confines of these two
budget resolutions, there seems to the senator from New Mexico,
chairman of this conference and the chairman of the Senate
conferees, that no useful purpose will be served, with the
situation being what it is, for us to proceed. We'll
discuss the budget deadlock in a focus section later in
the program when we also have a newsmaker interview on
the shape of tax reform with Senate Finance Committee chairman
Robert Packwood. More than 20 people died today in a
series of explosions at an Oklahoma fireworks factory. Thirty-one people
were in the factory's five buildings at the time; three
of the five buildings were demolished. There was no immediate
word on the cause of the explosions, which were felt
nearly 15 miles away. An Oklahoma highway patrolman described the
scene. We found bodies out into the woods and what
have you, so it was a massive explosion. We still
have some magazines over the hill that are still live
and are capable of going off. We have the fire
department here and the sheriff's helping us and we've got
other towns around that are helping us secure the area
so we can make sure it is safe. Lieutenant King,
didn't this same place blow up about six years ago?
Yes, sir, it did. Same company? Yes, sir, as far
as I know. The fireworks company is named the Aerlex
Corporation. Their factory is near Hallett, Oklahoma, a town of
200, 40 miles west of Tulsa. And the situation in
Anaheim, California, has turned more dangerous. Toxic fumes have been
pouring from an agriculture warehouse fire there since Saturday. Ten
people, including one fireman, have been treated for injuries, and
9,000 people have evacuated their homes in the area. Spokesmen
said potentially explosive chemicals remain in the warehouse. Here is
a further report by Marika Gerard of L.A. News, an
independent service. The fire started late Saturday night in the
Larry Fricker Company, a pesticide and herbicide warehouse in Orange
County. Because of the potential danger from toxic fumes, 2,000
people were initially asked to leave nearby homes while firefighters
fought the blaze. However, by Monday, as the chemicals continued
to smoulder, the evacuation area was doubled. Firefighters first thought
they were dealing with only a few potentially dangerous chemicals,
but now believe there may be as many as 80
chemicals housed in the building, including highly flammable ammonium sulfate
and ammonium nitrate compounds. So far there have been no
serious injuries as a result of the fire. Although many
evacuees have complained of sore throats and itchy eyes, very
few have been treated. Today an extra U.S. Coast Guard
strike team has arrived from San Francisco to help county
firefighters neutralize the smouldering chemicals. Officials say it could be
as many as two or three days before evacuated residents
will be allowed back in their homes. Investigators said today
that wreckage from the Air India plane which crashed on
Sunday showed the 747 broke up in the air, but
it was too early to say if it was blown
up. Meanwhile, searchers scaled down the hunt for bodies. Of
the 329 people aboard, the bodies of 131 have been
recovered from the Atlantic west of Ireland. Here's a report
from Kate Adie of Visnews. The intensive air search over,
helicopters have been on standby to help with the more
specialized hunt for the flight recorder. Early today a Chinook
headed out to sea carrying technical and electronics personnel who
will be attempting to wrest some information from below the
sea's surface. The Royal Navy's Challenger took them on board,
but she's now patrolling in an area with only a
few hints of the jumbo visible occasionally. The Irish have
fishery protection vessels crisscrossing the designated area, and there's still
more equipment being brought in for what has to be
a very long shot at discovering the relevant part of
the plane. No bodies have been located for over 24
hours, and the sea will have dispersed the wreckage to
an extent that the Irish authorities have asked for a
lookout to be kept on the shores of Britain, France
and even Spain. Air India suspended service to Canada, where
the doomed flight originated, demanding tighter airport security there. Authorities
in India, Japan, Canada and Britain are investigating two Sikh
fugitives who might be linked with the Air India disaster
and a bomb explosion at Tokyo airport. The bomb was
in luggage which had arrived on a Canadian Pacific plane
from Vancouver. Two Sikhs, Lal Singh and Ammand Singh, booked
tickets on that flight to Tokyo. One canceled his booking.
Two men of the same name are wanted in the
United States on charges of plotting to assassinate Indian Prime
Minister Rajiv Gandhi. The U.S. Transportation Department is sending President
Reagan a list of ways to improve airline security in
this country. A department spokesman said the list includes placing
armed air marshals aboard planes flying the most threatened routes,
better anti-terrorist training for airline crews, and accelerated research and
development of explosive detection devices. White House spokesman Larry Speakes
said he thought the President would certainly approve the measures.
In economic news today Japan announced it was cutting or
ending import tariffs on more than eighteen hundred items, and
promised more measures next month. Prime Minister Nakasone, who has
urged greater Japanese imports to lessen the huge trade imbalance,
particularly with this country, commented, "I hope foreign governments appreciate
our efforts." The U.S. government reported today that orders for
large manufactured goods rose 4.1 percent in May, propelled mainly
by a big increase in orders for military hardware. Commerce
Secretary Baldrige said the gain offsets most of the recent
setbacks. And IBM, the world's biggest computer company, said it's
buying a 30 percent share of MCI Communications. We look
first tonight at the latest in the TWA hostage crisis,
now in its 12th day. President Reagan, said his spokesman,
Larry Speakes, late this afternoon, is considering several options aimed
at freeing the 40 Americans being held by Shiite Moslem
terrorists. Those actions include trying to close down the Beirut
airport to all air traffic and an economic boycott of
Lebanon. Senator Richard Lugar, Republican of Indiana and chairman of
the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, was extensively briefed by Secretary
of State Shultz on the options available to the President.
He met at the White House today with President Reagan
as well. Senator Lugar, why the decision to hold back
for now? Well, I think that we are still involved
essentially in the negotiation mode. We're working with other countries
that are friendly, some that are perhaps not so friendly.
We attempt to explore with Israel all the ways we
can cooperate with that very friendly government. There are a
lot of options the President could adopt, and I think
this was a good day for sharing with congressional leadership
and with others how we might proceed. Is one of
the key diplomatic options being pursued is a way to
get Israel to release the seven hundred Shiites they're holding?
No, our position remains the same, and I think it
needs to be insistently commented on. We're not going to
negotiate with terrorists, we're not going to insist that Israel
bow to terrorists. The prime minister of Israel, Shimon Peres,
pointed out in interviews on Sunday that eight different hijackings
have already afflicted Israel. He has been involved in negotiating
for the release of Israelis three times. He's an old
hand at this type of experience. He's in good touch
with George Shultz, our secretary of state, and our ties
are of that nature, not ones of pressure. Well, then
what kind of negotiation--what is there to negotiate about
and with whom? Well, we believe that the predicament of
those who are holding our hostages is not necessarily secure.
We think that there are potential arguments or pressures that
could be brought to bear that would make a difference
for them. We're attempting to explore each one of those
and it seems to me that the impression that everyone
ought to have, they ought to have correctly, is that
this President is at his post, so is the secretary
of state, Mr. McFarlane and the others, in good touch
with congressional supporters and, as a matter of fact, in
a bipartisan sense with the leadership. And we're prepared steadily,
day after day, to explore every option. Well, Senator, you
probably know more than anybody in the Congress right now
as we speak about what is going on. Do you
have any particular reason to be optimistic? Oh, I'm always
optimistic in the sense that I believe that essentially the
things we are doing are right. We believe in the
sanctity of life and the freedom of human beings. We
believe that a majority of nations share that point of
view, and we have a lot going for us in
terms of our idealism, in terms of our track record.
I think we have to be optimistic about that. I
think, secondly, we are a great power. We're working with
other great powers. We have, it seems to me, many
more options and much more political stability than do the
people with whom we're contending. In other words, there are
things going on that make you feel hopeful that this
thing is going to be resolved fairly quickly? Yes, there
are. And, as a matter of fact, the President today
in his meeting with bipartisan leadership of course gave an
opportunity for Mr. McFarlane to brief us all, to give
us the parameters of what we might be doing. But
we also discussed the need to move to cut the
budget deficit, to have a tax bill and reform, to
get the appropriations on track. This is the government that
is operating. I would think perhaps the hostage crisis has
brought us together with much more intensity, with maybe more
urgency with regard to the requirements for successful governance of
this country. The options on the Lebanon crisis, if diplomacy
does not work. Did the President indicate to you how
long he's going to let these diplomatic avenues run their
course before he takes any further action? No, the President
has not made a decision on that, and I don't
think that he ought to. I think his role is
to explore each of the avenues and to continue applying
pressure, to continue trying out new situations. There is no particular
reason we ought to signal what day and what hour
we believe something ought to come into play. I think
we are required, however, to set the stage for our
allies or for even nations that are not too friendly
for the American people to understand various options, so that
when and if the time comes that the President asks
for cooperation he receives it. You know, for example, the
other evening he suggested that it would not be advisable
to fly into Greece in the same numbers that we
had been doing. Some Americans observed that that was probably
right. Others said, "We've got vacations and plans and we're
going about life as usual." We're going to have to
come into a different mode, I think, of public cooperation
in this country, and I think the President is wisely
setting the stage for that. What's your own view of
an economic boycott of Lebanon as a way to go?
I think it entirely depends upon the specifics, and I
think these will be carefully drafted as potential options that
Lebanon--How would it be done, Senator? Well, I suspect
that through the cooperation of the nations that are involved
in the trade of Lebanon. Some would cooperate, hopefully; some
might not. But Lebanon is a country with great difficulties.
I think we have to assume that some of the
Lebanese factions are not that keen on the Shiite Moslems
to begin with, that there could in fact be some
pressure internally within Lebanon to deal with the rest of
the world. Same on closing the Beirut airport to all
airline traffic? Well, that would be a more substantial step.
Secretary Shultz has pointed out that 15% of all hijackings
in recent times have occurred in or out of the
Beirut airport. We had a continual amount of terrorism sort
of originating in that situation. That may not be the
only airport in the world that needs attention, but that
certainly is one and that would make a difference. How
would we close it down, sir? How could the United
States close it down? Well, there are means of doing
that, and I really don't want to get into the
tactics, but I think the overall situation is one that
is fully within our power. There was a report on
CNN late today that one of the options was to
bomb the airport closed. Is that being seriously considered? Well,
I think that that would be a very serious step.
I think the options the President discussed, at least publicly
today, are ones that do not require that violence or
potential loss of life. The President is operating in a
very humane and, it seems to me, careful, prudent manner.
Senator, thank you. Robin? We discuss the President's actions and
further options now with three Americans with different experience and
perspectives. Joining us at public station WTTW-Chicago are Donald Rumsfeld,
President Ford's secretary of defense and for a while a
special Middle East representative for President Reagan; and Joseph Sisco,
undersecretary of state in the Nixon and Ford administrations. Here
in New York is Jesse Jackson, whose contacts with Syria
secured the release of a captured Navy pilot during the
U.S. involvement in Lebanon. Starting with you, Joseph Sisco, how
do you react to the course that Senator Lugar has
outlined, the course of action Senator Lugar has outlined? Well,
the President underscored in his press conference that he's going
to explore every diplomatic avenue. I think we've got to
continue on this course of action. If there are some
modest points of pressure that can be applied, it might
be helpful, but it seems to me that we're committed
to a course of working through Nabih Berri. The Syrians
have very considerable influence in Lebanon, and you could make
a case that from the point of view of their
national interests they could be helpful. Whether they will or
not, I think this has to be tested, as well
as a number of other countries that have influence in
this situation. I think for the time being the President
is right in pursuing all of these diplomatic avenues. What
do you think, Donald Rumsfeld? My personal view is that
the President is correct in making a judgment that it
would be harmful to the United States and the people
of the United States to yield to the terrorists. I
think what's important is that we come out of this
incident, this circumstance, this terribly tragic situation, with a broadly
accepted anti-terrorist policy for the United States of America. The
fact of the matter is that the purpose of terrorism
is to terrorize. It's also true that there are states
that sponsor it, that facilitate it and that tolerate it.
And it strikes me that it's time for the international
community to make lepers of those nations and impose political-economic
sanctions on them. I also think it's time for the
United States to provide the American people the reasonable level
of intelligence-gathering capability that they ought to expect, and to
train and equip and exercise and deploy military capabilities so
that on selective occasions they'll be available for preemption in
the event intelligence information permits that, rescue where it's appropriate
and, in other instances, retaliation where that may be appropriate.
Jesse Jackson, how do you react to the course that
you just heard Senator Lugar outline the President's going to
take? Well, if the object is to save American lives,
we ought to pursue the course of negotiations over and
against any kind of military option. A military option would
most certainly--a) we'd be killing innocent people there and
most assuredly get the Americans killed. And so if the
object is saving their lives, then the process of negotiation
ought to continue. We ought to quit playing a game
suggesting that we are not negotiating. We are not negotiating
directly, perhaps, but we are negotiating through third parties, hoping
that Israel on the one hand can help us by
closing the window on the earlier release than they had
planned of the hostages because there is linkage between the
hostages and those who are being detained in Israel. On
the other hand, making an even broader appeal to Syria
to become even more involved because the reality is Syria
is a key factor in this situation. Among other things,
they occupy at least 70% of Lebanon and perhaps influence
it all. So I would hope if we're going to
pursue the route of negotiations that our language and rhetoric
style is that of that kind of an appeal and
reaching out. And if there is any military contingency plan,
it ought not be overt and threatening. In other words,
the hijackers did not threaten and have a press conference.
They acted and then had a press conference. So if
we're going to pursue negotiations, let's pursue that route, but
let's not jeopardize those who are there now by giving
the appearance of a threat. What do you think we
should be doing with Israel, first, before we move on
to Syria? Well, first of all, it's certain the President
did say that the holding of the detainees there is
against international law, and that was a rather major statement
for the President to make. On the other hand, the
holding of the American hostages is against international law, and
that's why some pursuit of a mutual exchange is significant.
You must appreciate the fact that as long as those
detainees remain in Israel, the less secure it makes Israel
as opposed to more secure. It's costing money, it's costing
politics, it's creating a greater target. So we ought to
be in a mode of encouraging an early mutual release.
What do you think of that, Joe Sisco, that we
should be increasing the pressure on Israel to get those
detainees out? My own feeling is that if an understanding
can be achieved, that the question of the release of
the detainees is not going to be the prime obstacle
in the situation. Equally important is whether Nabih Berri has
the power to achieve an understanding and to actually put
together a deal that he could make stick. I think
there is a big question mark in this regard, and
therefore I believe that the dialogue has to continue to
see whether these two elements can interact in a way
in which there will be no concessions and the number-one
priority is implemented, namely, the freeing of the hostages. Mr.
Rumsfeld, is the position we're not going to negotiate with
the terrorists, is that a realistic position? I think that
the--I mean, isn't there in fact going to be,
and hasn't there been all along, veiled negotiation to get
this exchange done and get it over with? Well, obviously
there have been a lot of public pronouncements by Nabih
Berri and by President Reagan and by a whole number
of participants to this exercise. But I think what's important
to appreciate, from the standpoint of the United States, is
that it's the obligation of the President of the United
States to interest himself in the safety of these hostages
to be sure, but it's also to interest himself in
the safety of the American people all across this globe.
And he has to, for example, recognize that how he
manages this situation will have an effect on the lives
of other Americans, and we can't withdraw from the world.
We have interests in the world. Second, it will have
an effect on Western Europe. What will Western Europe think
if the United States alters its policy dramatically because we
have hostages held? That would suggest to them that our
commitments to Europe are not worth much. What would King
Hussein in Jordan, who we have an obligation and interest
in seeing proceed with the peace process in the Middle
East--what's his view when he sees U.S. policy spin
a 180-degree turn--were it to do so--because some
hostages were taken? So a President has an obligation that
is broader and bigger, it seems to me, than the
kind of public micromanagement and amateur brain-surgeoning that's taking place
on the public airwaves with respect to this crisis. It
seems to me that we ought to call a negotiation
a negotiation and we ought to call a linkage, linkage
because that's what we are looking at. We ought to
seek the release of the hostages, the 47 of them,
not just the 40 of them, but release and reevaluation
of our foreign policy is in order, for when you
negotiate you are in fact using moral authority and credibility
and leverage. Mr. Rumsfeld says that it would weaken the
overall posture of the United States if the President were
to do something to achieve what you've just described which
made other nations doubt. One of the reevaluation factors is
that in that region we have substantial interests but our--
we have too few interests and too few friends, and
so a good foreign policy there must broaden the base
of friends and allies. It is not good politics, in
my judgment, or good reasoning in that region to have
a secondary relationship between our President and Mr. Assad as
opposed to a primary one. We ought to be against
terrorism, but then you can't really say it with gusto
when you're South Africa's number-one trading partner. And that's why
reevaluation is as important as our negotiating for release. What
do you think of that, Mr. Sisco, that we need
to reevaluate the whole foreign policy in the area? Well,
my own judgment is that as far as President Assad
is concerned, with whom I have had over the years
as many as 15 or 20 meetings, this is a
tough, shrewd Syrian nationalist and objectively speaking, there are reasons
why he should want a semblance of stability in Lebanon,
largely because he's got internal problems of his own to
attend to. I believe the course of our policy in
the Middle East has been sound. We've been the indispensable
third-party element to try to make progress on the Arab-Israeli-Palestinian
issue. The only progress that's been made over the last
12 years has been under the aegis of the United
States, and therefore the fact that we're an object of
terrorism I think attests to the fact that we're the
crucial element in the situation. I would add this, if
I might, that with the exception of Syria and Iran
and Libya, I think it's reasonable to say that most
of the nations of the Middle East, the overwhelming majority, are
deeply concerned about terrorism. They are in fear for their
regimes, for their diplomats. A number of Jordanian diplomats have
been killed. It is not to suggest that by suddenly
altering our policy with respect to terrorism that we would
gain the friendship of these nations. They're as concerned as
we are about terrorism. I'd just like to go around
to each of you very quickly: do you think that
if the measures we heard outlined, the economic boycott, the
closing of the airport, were achieved, that they would increase
the pressure on the people holding the hostages? Mr. Sisco,
do you think so? A psychological signal that we're there
and that we have power, but I do not assume
that it will have or would have any decisive impact
on the actual dialogue that's going on. Mr. Rumsfeld? My
view is that the President of the United States has
a very difficult assignment in this instance, that the task
ought to be not to simplify the problem for the
terrorists and those who wish us ill but to complexify
it. And I don't think that by discussing specific things
he might do that it contributes constructively to his handling
of it. What do you think of the measures--If
we're not the essential supplier to Lebanon, then cutting off
supplies will not radically affect that situation. Secondly, if that
were a coherent government as we know governments to be,
that would work better than it would work in this
situation. I think that appealing more and more to Israel,
appealing more and more to Syria to be an active
third force in this situation may be our best route
out. And I hope that we will pursue the route
of negotiation and if there are other options the government
certainly ought to reserve the right to not surface them.
Thank you. Jim? Yes, back to you, Senator Lugar. You've
been listening to this. Is Reverend Jackson right that the
answer to this really lies with Israel and Syria? Not
necessarily, but clearly our request to Assad to help in
Syria is an important one. He could make a big
difference. He could influence Nabih Berri and, indeed, they may
have been in consultation today on this point. So that's
an important link. Israel is crucial for a good number
of reasons, some of which are obvious, some of which
may be seen in the future. But I think, as
Mr. Rumsfeld said, we need to have a complex series
of things as opposed to trying to define what will
work, what won't work, quantify it in advance. Let's sort
of keep the ball rolling. Well, is Syria being helpful thus
far? Well, I don't want to characterize that dialogue. It's
an important one. It's an ongoing one presently. And I
would just appeal for everybody to keep that channel open
and to suspend judgment until we really know what they're
willing to do. For whatever reasons, is there any indication
tonight that Israel may soon release the 700 detainees? No
more so than last night. Israel will move in accordance
with Israeli law. That's what Israel ought to do. I
reject entirely the idea of linkage, of negotiation with terrorists.
That will not going to occur on our part or
that of Israel. Well, what about Reverend Jackson's point, whether
you call it negotiation or not, it's still negotiations if
you're talking to people. Not necessarily so. There's a pretty
good distinction between negotiations and consultation, conversation, whispering in the
ear or this type of thing. I think when we're
talking about negotiations we are defining parties, their status, their
legitimacy, and it has a very important distinction. All right,
Senator Lugar, thank you very much. Robin? Still to come
on the NewsHour tonight, the failure of House and Senate
conferees to agree on a new budget with two of
the key players, Senator William Armstrong and Congressman William Gray;
and a newsmaker interview with Senate Finance Committee chairman Robert
Packwood. Now to focus segment two, the breakdown on the
budget. Two weeks ago 26 members of a House and
Senate conference committee opened negotiations over how to trim the
1986 federal budget. Both agreed $56-or-so billion was the right
amount, but disagreed over how to do it. The big
differences were over defense spending and Social Security. Well, today
they hollered uncle. Compromise turned out to be impossible, said
they; the conference committee's work is done and has failed.
First, correspondent June Cross reports on the two weeks of
wrangling that led to today's breakdown. The Senate wants to
freeze cost-of-living adjustments for Social Security. The House wants a
freeze on defense. There things stood last Wednesday when Senate
conference chairman Pete Domenici offered a compromise. The Senate would
add more for low-income programs, but only if the House
would add inflation increases for defense. House conference chairman Bill
Gray nixed that idea. Then on Friday he made a
counter-offer. The House would eliminate $1.5 billion more in social
spending, but there would be no give on either defense
or Social Security. That led Senate Republican Slade Gorton to
call the Democrats' bluff. I don't see any really serious
changes in this from the original House position at all.
They have made no changes at all in the two
largest functions of defense and in the various income security
and Social Security areas, and they've made exceedingly cosmetic changes
in a number of other areas. By their own figures
they amount to only $1.5 billion. A billion and a
half is not chicken feed. In some of the areas
we made very--more cuts were very painful, such as
in the Appalachia Regional Commission, the EDA, all these other
areas. We didn't--if that's going to be the position,
we should decide and not waste members' time sitting talking
about different functions. If we're going to accomplish nothing, it's
no point in sitting here. So let's take out and go
to the House. We went about 90% your way on
what you called poverty programs. We didn't even argue whether
they were or they weren't. About 90% when you take
housing out. That isn't enough. I mean, your counter-offer, no,
it might say thanks, but in the meantime it says
you want all of it. Democratic Senator Lawton Chiles attempted
to bridge the gap between Senate Republicans and the House
Democrats. I'm sure that with the cards that we're now
playing with there's no way you can play this hand
and come out with a deficit reduction that is sufficient
to really help this economy the way we should. You
know, we've got two issues here, defense and Social Security.
No, I'm not making an offer at this point because
I'm not authorized to do so for my conferees, but
you know maybe what we could do is we give
you defense and you give us the COLA. Then we
can begin to fight on the rest of it right
here. How do you think about that? What?! It's split.
All your way. I mean, on the major account. You'd
get defense. You said, you give us our defense and
we give you your COLAs? I didn't hear it that
way; I heard it the reverse. You said we go
with our defense number and your COLA number? Is that
your offer, not that I'm going to accept it. No,
that's not an offer. Although Gray's joke had lessened the
tension, no one had budged. Democrats and Republicans on both
sides talked among themselves over the weekend. They talked some
more behind closed doors yesterday. But for all the talking,
the two sides were no closer today than they were
last week. I don't want this to be interpreted in
any way that the House conferees and in particular the
distinguished chairman of the House conference have not tried their
very best. It's just one of those situations for now
that, consistent with the confines of these two budget resolutions,
there seems to the Senator from New Mexico, chairman of
this conference and the chairman of the Senate conferees, that
no useful purpose will be served, with the situation being
what it is, for us to proceed. The deadlock makes
compromise seem impossible. House and Senate leaders say that makes
it likely that both houses will pass their own spending
bills without agreeing on any budget resolution at all. On
the House side of the negotiations, House Budget Committee chairman
William Gray is with us; from the Senate, Senator William
Armstrong, a member of the Senate Budget Committee. They are
both in a studio on Capitol Hill. Senator Armstrong, what
went wrong from your perspective? Well, I don't think we're
off the rails yet. We're at a point of decision-making,
and I believe that the breakdown or the suspension of
the budget conference now is really quite timely, because I
think what'll happen is that as the members go home
over the 4th of July recess they're going to hear
from their constituents, "You guys get back to the table
and put something together." Do you really think the public
cares that much about this? Yes, indeed I do. In
fact, the republic's got a lot of things on its
mind, but with the possible exception of the hostage issue,
I believe that the most pressing public policy concern that
people feel at home, that they really feel in their
heart, is this budget deficit question. Well, Senator, if you
were to go home to Colorado, is there anything a
constituent could tell you that would change your view on
any of these issues that caused this breakdown? Well, you
know, I don't think I'm the crux of the matter
because I'm there to make a deal. In fact, I
think we're a lot closer perhaps than some people might
believe. And the essence of a good deal at this
point would be to take the low numbers. Where the
House is low, take the House numbers. Where the Senate
is low, take the Senate numbers. Now, that would mean,
in my opinion, that we'd end up pretty close to
the Senate numbers on domestic programs and cost-of-living adjustments and
pretty close to the House numbers on national defense. There'd
be a lot of people who'd holler about that, but
in one form or another--In other words--it'd be
popular in a lot of places. In simple terms, you
would still cut defense spending about what? Explain that in
the two key areas, Social Security and defense. Well, the
essence of it is that the Senate has proposed to
cut Social Security cost-of-living adjustments, the cost-of-living adjustments for federal
employees, retirees and others and a number of other domestic
programs. I'm saying in my own opinion a good compromise
would be to take the Senate numbers on those programs
and then in defense, where we're above the House, to
go to the House number. In other words, it'd be
a symmetrical compromise, but it'd be a compromise for lower
spending rather than for bidding spending up. Congressman Gray, is
that the makings of a deal? No, I don't think
it is the makings of a deal. I think clearly
when you look at the vote that we had in
the House for a budget resolution, they got the greatest
number of votes since the budget act bipartisanly. We were
saying that there are some policy choices that we have
to make and not just numbers. The policy choices were
to restrain defense spending, give defense a $15.1-billion increase, freeze
budget authority; secondly, reduce domestic spending a great deal but
without eliminating a dozen programs and providing for an inflationary
increase for low-income programs and then a policy decision bipartisanly
made that we did not want to freeze the cost-of-living
adjustment for our veterans and for our elderly. We are
not freezing defense, we are freezing the budget authority. You
are giving $15.1 billion additional in outlays. And it was
the feeling of the House bipartisanly that that would be
inappropriate. What we suggested to our colleagues in the Senate
was that the framework for a decision might be one
for the defense question and the COLA question to be
linked together structurally and that we would move to their
position on the budget authority on defense, which is what
the President wanted and which also Caspar Weinberger said was
needed, and they would also come to our position on
COLAs. And thus, as a result of last week's deliberations,
where we clearly demonstrated a willingness to cut more as
well as eliminate half a dozen programs which we had
not eliminated in the House budget proposal and their willingness
to go up in the low-income programs, we felt that
we could come to some discussion--decision. And then what
happened, Congressman? Essentially what was said, as you heard in
your little film clip when I made that suggestion last
Friday, it was further amplified later, and the answer was
no. Senator, why is the answer no? Well, because that's
just a suggestion to compromise at the higher figures in
each case. In other words, Congressman Gray is proposing that
we compromise at the Senate number, which is the high
number in defense and at the House number, which is
the high number on domestic programs, and you end up
without any material budget savings at all. What would the--
I'm saying let's go to the lower numbers in each
case and get a bigger deficit reduction, which is clearly
what's needed. I mean, the economy needs that, it's obvious
to all of us. In other words, the net result
of doing what Congressman Gray proposed would not have been
a $56-billion budget cut? Oh, no. It'd be much less
than $56 billion depending on how far you went in
that direction, but obviously if you take the higher numbers
in every budget function you end up with less savings
than either the House or Senate had on their own.
He's right, isn't he, Congressman? No. I would have to
disagree with my colleague, Senator Armstrong. If you did exactly
what I said, go to the budget authority figure for
'86 that the Senate had--the budget authority figure, and
go to our figure on COLAs, you would have, including
the cuts of 1.5 additional that we gave last week,
you would be talking about a $57.5-billion deficit reduction package,
which is $7 billion more than what the President asked
for, and $2.5 billion more than what the Senate did.
What we're really talking about is not simply numbers and
not simply going to the lowest number. We are talking
about policy choices and trying to bring about some balance
and equity in choosing policy. And so I don't think
it's adequate enough to just say let's go to the
low figure, because the House has said we do not
want to penalize our veterans, our senior citizens, who have
already had some very significant cuts over the last four
years. And we have said that we do want to
give an increase to the low-income programs, but we do
want to cut those non-defense discretionary spending programs. Senator Armstrong,
let me ask you this. It's two weeks now that
you've sat across the table from Congressman Gray and his
House colleagues. Was the spirit of compromise in the air
from the other side from your perspective? Yes, I think
so. I don't take lightly what's happened today, but it's
not the end of the world. We've been through these
things before, and there's sort of a ritual to it.
I believe we're going to make a deal and I
believe that even some things that perhaps some of the
participants are now saying are unthinkable will be thinkable and
will be done. Why? Because, in the end, the greatest
penalty that we can inflict upon the people of this
country--the veterans, the poor, business, working men and women,
municipalities; everybody that has a stake in it, the worst
thing we can do--is to just let these enormous
deficits occur. We're faced with the prospect of $200 billion
in deficits every year, and if that happens, our country's
economy is going through the wringer. And so I think
a lot of us are going to be prepared to
sacrifice on defense, on cost-of-living adjustments and other things in
order to prevent it. Congressman Gray, do you anticipate going
home to Philadelphia and then coming back after the 4th
of July with a new view toward what you could
compromise on this deal? Well, I don't know. I certainly
would be interested in hearing what the American public has
to say about the policy choices. We in the House
have offered a series of policy choices that give you
strong reduction by spending cuts of over $56 billion. The
compromise I just suggested, which, by the way, a Republican
member of Congress, Jack Kemp, in the conference today, said
was an outstanding attempt at compromise which he would support,
and he did not vote for the House budget. I
believe that that represents a good choice for the American
people. Obviously the Senate does not. I think that if
the Senate budget was put back on the floor of
the Senate it would not pass. However, be that as
it may, it is my hope that we will come
back and will be able to reach agreement. If we
do not, I am going to urge the leadership of
the House to move forward with our appropriation bills in
July and achieve the $56-billion worth of spending cuts by
keeping under the targets set by the Budget Committee and
thus show the American people by September that we have
cut spending for fiscal year '86. And just go it
alone, in other words? If necessary, go it alone, and
because I just think that when I see the President,
who is walking away from this process, Stockman revising his
estimates, a tax reform package that is a revenue loser,
I think that the problem that my friend Mr. Domenici
faces--and I have the greatest respect for him--is
that basically he doesn't have enough support to do what
he needs to do in terms of compromising on some
key issues like defense and COLAs. Is that right, Senator
Armstrong? No, I don't think so. I think in fact
that it's easy to talk about achieving these budget savings
without a budget resolution, as Congressman Gray is doing, if
all you're really talking about doing is whacking it out
of defense, which is the biggest single component of the
House plan. We're calling in the Senate resolution, and I
hope in the final version, that we will see basic
reform, meaning statutory change in programs like Amtrak, UDAG and
many of the programs--the Ex-Im Bank. That's not a
simple job and you can't just do it through appropriations.
You need the discipline of the budget process. All right.
Well, gentlemen, both of you have a good holiday and
we'll see you and what happens when you come back.
Thanks. Thanks a lot. Robin? They just mentioned tax reform.
In the last few weeks President Reagan has been pushing
his tax reform, tax simplification plan as a proposal that
will benefit all Americans. Tonight we have a newsmaker interview
with the man faced with the political realities of getting
that tax plan, or some version of it, through Congress.
He is Republican Senator Robert Packwood of Oregon, chairman of
the Senate Finance Committee. Judy Woodruff has the interview and
the background. Judy? Senator Packwood has said he agrees with
the need for tax reform in general, but he has
charged that the Reagan tax plan hurts middle-class taxpayers. Specifically
he objects to a proposal to eliminate a key deduction
for families with two wage earners who can currently write
off part of their income. And he also opposes part
of the administration's plan which reduces the tax benefit for
families who deduct child care expenses, a concept the administration
itself is now considering rewriting. Senator Packwood joins us here
in our Washington studio. Senator, first of all, let me
ask you about this stalemate on the budget. What effect
does it have on tax reform if there is no,
or if there may be no, agreement on budget? Almost
none, Judy. We've been moving along on tax reform. The
House has been having hearings, we've been having hearings in
the Senate. And we were going to go along and
get a tax bill or not get a tax bill,
as the case may be, regardless of the budget. So
it makes no difference. Which one takes precedence in your
mind? Oh, in my mind getting the deficit down, the
budget takes precedence. We can do both, but if you
had to pick just one, I would pick the budget
and the deficit reduction because we will work and sweat
and scream and argue about the tax reform bill and
at the end of it, if we're lucky, it's what
we call revenue neutral--it doesn't lose any money, it
doesn't pick up any money. So it means it doesn't
make a dime's dent in the deficit. So if there
is no agreement on the deficit, what you're saying is
that tax reform what, has the same--Tax reform goes
right ahead because the budget was unrelated to the tax
reform bill. The budget that passed the House, the budget
that passed the Senate, didn't ask for any additional taxes.
So there was no imposition on my committee in the
Senate and Chairman Rostenkowski in the House to come up
with any new taxes. And the President's tax reform bill
doesn't ask for any new taxes. So we're just working
along on a bill that, if we succeed, will not
increase nor, hopefully, decrease the federal revenues. We just heard
Senator Armstrong say that he thinks the number-one priority, domestic
priority in the minds of Americans now is deficit reduction.
He didn't mention tax reform in that context. Where is
the priority on tax reform? Well, when you go home--
and this is the best way you can judge it,
because letters are now so instigated you're never sure if
they're an accurate reflection of public opinion. There is no
question when you go home the top of the list
question is deficit, deficit, deficit, cut defense spending, put limitations
on the COLAs, get those deficits down. Tax reform is
much lower down in the public conscious--they may get
to it, but normally--normally when you get to it,
it is a question asked by somebody who doesn't like
some particular provision in the tax reform plan. So how
does that affect you and the goal you've set for
yourself? Oh, when you've been in this business long enough,
you realize it's the squeaky wheel that you hear. Those
who benefit from the tax reform plan, and there are
many who do benefit, don't say much about it. Those
who are hurt, or think they're hurt, complain a lot.
And you've got to judge that and you've got to
realize that the complainers are not always a majority. All
right, let's talk about your objection to abandoning the deduction
for two-earner families. First of all, in simple terms, how
does the current law work? In simple terms it works
as follows. Let's say you make $25,000 and your husband
makes $20,000. And before you got married you each paid
a tax--you on 25; he paid a tax on
20. Thanks for giving me the higher salary. Well, I
know your husband, as a matter of fact. He'll probably
call me on that when I said that. But in
any event, there is a situation where often you paid
less taxes individually than you paid collectively if you got
married. That was called the marriage penalty, and it was
incentive--alleged an incentive--not to get married. So we
passed a law some time ago that said in that
situation you can take as a deduction 10% of the
lesser earning spouse's amount. In your case, if your husband
made $20,000, you could take a $2,000 deduction. The administration's
bill just gets rid of that. And what does that
mean for the middle class? Well, what it means is
that if you've got a wife and a husband, say,
total they're making 30, $35,000 together and they've got a
couple of children and maybe one's four or five and
one of them's in a day care facility, they probably
come out losers on the bill by a slight amount,
and I don't--none of us in Congress intended that.
I don't think the administration deliberately intended that, but it
was interesting when we first had the statistics from the
Treasury Department, one of us--I wasn't, but one of
us should have been smart enough to say, wait a
minute, there's something missing because there were no statistics on
these two-earner families. Well, now what are you saying, because
I remember Secretary Baker, the treasury secretary, said that middle-income
families will benefit? Well, but the statistics we had were
one-earner families and normally it was husband works, wife stays
home. Therefore they have no day care expenses either because
the wife is staying home with the children. Now, were
those statistics left out intentionally? I hope not. But none
of us caught it initially. One of the nice things
you can say about lobbying groups in the town of
Washington, because they always get knocked a lot, is in
this case the ones that picked it up first were
the lobbying groups that represent the single parents who are
interested in day care or representing two-earner families, and they
caught this right away. So you're proposing that we keep
the law as is? Well, I think the treasury's going
to change it, unless I miss my guess, because I
don't think the administration wants to go forward with a
bill that is going to penalize people who are not
taking advantage of shelters--they're not putting their money in
cattle feed lots or something like that. They are honest,
decent people who bowl on Wednesday and take their kids
hunting and fishing on Saturday, and they're lucky to make
30, $35,000, and I cannot believe that the administration wants
to penalize them. Now, the same thing with the child
care tax benefit. What you had there--at the moment
you have what is known as a child care credit.
A credit is money you can deduct from the taxes
you actually owe. If you have a $200 credit and
you owe $1,000 taxes, you pay $800. That's a credit.
A deduction is an amount that you deduct from your
total income before you figure your taxes. You make $50,000,
you have a $1,000 deduction, you pay taxes on $49,000.
Well, if you're in the 50% tax bracket, and you
deduct $1,000, that's worth $500 to you. If you're in
the 20% tax bracket, it's worth $200, whereas a credit
is worth the same to everybody, rich or poor. So
it tilts downward toward the poorer families. So what do
you think the administration will do on that? Well, I
don't know what the administration will do on this because
they knew what the credit was, they changed it from
a credit, which tilts toward lower income to a deduction,
which tilts toward higher income. That, combined with the elimination
of this so-called marriage deduction, hurts a lot of middle-income,
two-earner families with one or two children. And I just
cannot believe the administration wants to do that. But you
said a minute ago you don't know--I don't know
what they're going to do. If it was done deliberately
or what. I mean, what do you think? I mean,
you talk to these people. I hope not. I hope
not. Well, I don't think Jim Baker, the secretary of
the treasury, did it deliberately. I mean, I know him.
I know the knock that's going around. You know, Pat
Buchanan says a traditional family is the man and you
stay home and take care of the kids and we
won't have as many drug problems and juvenile delinquency problems
and auto wrecks and all of that. And that isn't
the typical family anymore. The typical married family today, the
husband and the wife work, for money, in the marketplace.
So do you think the administration is just behind the
times or what? Oh, we all indulge in nostalgia and
we all remember when we grew up, and I guess
when most of us my age grew up there were
many, many, many fewer women, fewer mothers in the work
force working for money. Today that is just not the
situation, and we're not going to turn the clock back.
We're not going to go back. Those women are not
going to leave the labor force. And we might as
well realize that that is the family in America today.
You'd like to see these provisions changed, obviously. Any other
provisions in there that you think doom or seriously hurt
the prospects for the administration's plan? Oh, everything--almost everything
that's in it causes the bill to have some negatives
in some people's minds. You're familiar with the--especially New
York City and the state and local tax deduction. Any
state that's a high-tax state thinks that they suffer under
this. But I think on that what you want to
do is look at the bill at the end. The
example I would give you there, would you rather pay
10% taxes on $20,000 of income, which would be $2,000
taxes, or would you rather pay 4% or 5% taxes
on $30,000 income and not have any deductions? Clearly the
latter. Overall, do you still predict a bill by the
end of the year? It's tight, but if the House
can get a bill to the Senate by October 15th,
we can have one to the President by the end
of the year. Senator Robert Packwood, thank you for being
with us. Thank you. Jim? Again, the major stories of
this day. President Reagan is considering an economic boycott of
Lebanon. House and Senate conferees broke off negotiations on a
1986 federal budget, saying their differences were irreconcilable for now,
and more than 20 persons died in a series of
explosions in an Oklahoma fireworks factory. Good night, Robin. Good
night, Jim. That's our NewsHour tonight. We'll be back tomorrow
night. I'm Robert MacNeil. Good night.
