content
Good evening. A man walked into a bank in Brooklyn
yesterday intending to stage a holdup, and he shoved a
note at a woman teller. She shoved it back because
it was so badly written that she couldn't understand it.
By the time he went to rewrite it the alarms
were ringing. So even to hold up a bank a
certain amount of English grammar may be necessary today. To
many the decline of basic proficiency in English has reached
crisis proportions and is most disturbing in college. Here are
some examples from student compositions. One freshman wrote: "College also
brondens your views, helps you kop with things you will
face in the furture." Another student wrote: "In years or
Centrys ago people was dying because their minds were lazy
they believed in a lot of supersticion because they could
not think of any other reason for what was happening
to them." A third year college student discussing apathy asked:
"Could it be an inherent personality trait mutating from some
previous episode which created such a deviated atmosphere, or is
it by nature of the vast numbers of people walking
this earth today and their seemingly insurmountable task of constructive
interaction or interrelation?" Tonight we examine what many authorities are
calling the crisis in college writing skills: The reasons for
it, the remedies, and whether in fact such skills really
matter anymore. Jim? Robin, the evidence that something has gone
wrong with college level writing goes like this. Nationally, verbal
scores in the major, college entrance examination, the Scholastic Aptitude
Test or SAT, has fallen 45 points since 1965, from
478 to 434. At Ohio State University last year, 30%
of the freshmen were rated "unprepared to perform college level
writing tasks." Other colleges and universities all over the country
are saying similar if not worse things about their freshmen.
Many schools have reinstated stricter writing requirements, and enrollment in
remedial writing courses called bonehead English is booming. Students think
it's a problem too. They also have some theories on
why it's happening. There's no doubt that there's been a
decline in skills. I see it all around me. In
high school and in college all the signs are there
that this country is facing a full-scale, educational disaster. And
that isn't an exaggeration. I see around me students who
have gone through the educational process and absolutely are not
capable to function in society. They're functionally illiterate. I think
it's due to a decline in reading skills. There's a
paucity of reading, teaching correctly--of the ability to read
correctly, I should say, among students in early elementary school.
Therefore, by the time they reach college level they can't
read, so they can not write. I don't know. That
may be so. It's just--but it may have to
do with more people going to college too, that, you
know, colleges, you know, may be less selective in who they
choose and in more people going. It's a difficult problem
because I think writing requires a terrific amount of discipline,
and today discipline is not emphasized, you know. In our
culture it's something that's...Because of increased freedom the discipline
has suffered. My personal feelings are that it has something
to do with television and a general lack of emphasis
on written skills. In general people make telephone calls; they
watch TV. They don't read books. I mean we are
turning into a verbal society that's nonliterate. One man who
has been keeping an eye on college level writing skills
from the inside is Dr. James Scanlon, chairman of freshman
rhetoric at the University of Illinois, and a veteran college
English teacher. Dr. Scanlon, from your perspective, how serious is
this problem? Well, while the problem is certainly not a
new problem, there is increasing evidence that over the last
several years, 10 to 12 years, and even particularly in
the last five years, that the writing skills problem has
become much worse. Why now? It's a difficult question to
answer. The reasons for it have been suggested all over
the place from Watergate to Mayor Daly. But in fact
I think...Now wait a minute. How do they blame
writing skills on Watergate? The NCT, for instance, feels that
government double-speak had reached its height during Watergate, and that
students would have seen that material, and having seen that
material might have been influenced by it. I think what
I am trying to say is that the answer to
the question is not simple. People who have blamed Watergate
and Mayor Daly I think are a little further from
the point. The fact of the matter is that over
the last 12 or 15 years apparently writing skills at
all levels of education, particularly I think at the high
school level and at the college level, have been treated
with benign neglect. I think we are reaping the fruits
of that benign neglect now; we have students entering college
who are ill-prepared. We have, I think, students leaving college
who are ill-prepared. The first group ill-prepared for us; the
second group I'm afraid ill-prepared for their professions and their
business and professional life. What caused the benign neglect? Well,
I'm not exactly certain what cause I would attribute to
the benign neglect, but I think there were changes in
education in the 1960's. There was, quite rightly, I think,
a reexamination of most things in this country, in particular
education. There was a desire to increase the positive classroom
atmosphere, to draw more on individuality in the classroom. That
means an open classroom, in other words. Well, not inevitably
an open classroom. More freedom though. But more freedom in
the classroom. Or as the student just said, there is
not the discipline that there used to be, and that's
what he meant, right? Yes. In fact, I think the
problem became that a polarity was set up where the
understanding was that in order to have individuality and individual
freedom in the classroom, we had to take all that
we used to do and get rid of it. The
problem, I think, was that we weren't able to accommodate
the old with the new, and it seems to me
at this point that's the point of view that we
are coming around to, and that is that we must
be able to accommodate the old and new, and I
think we can. Based on your experience and on what
you have found out that has happened at other colleges
and universities, is this problem affect all kinds of students,
or a particular kind depending on economic background or whatever?
No. I think that the problem goes across all social
and economic backgrounds. Whether you look at public universities which
have open admission programs, public universities which have fairly selective
programs, or even private universities, you find the same kinds
of problems. Berkeley, Texas have found that the exemption rate
for freshman composition is down to a third or below.
Harvard and Cornell have doubled the money that they are
willing to spend on freshman composition. So, no matter where
you look, public or private, I think if you look
at the students' writing itself, you will find that economic
group, place of origin whether it's rural or city or
suburban has nothing directly to do with what you are
going to see. Thank you, Doctor. Robin? But how do
we judge good writing from bad? Some feel that questionable
standards, not inadequate skills may be at the bottom of
the current, so-called crisis. Minority groups suggest that standard, written
English is biased against them and their cultural heritage. Others
believe that time and technology are changing the language. What
was standard ten years ago isn't necessarily best today. If
you come from a predominantly black background as I do,
obviously, and your parents may not be from a particular
socioeconomic background, and you're influenced by your environment, and you're
going to talk the way people around you talk. When
you get into a situation, you go to college and
things of that nature, you're forced to talk the way
that they want you to talk, and subsequently you're forced
to write the way that they want you to write.
I think it's not overt racism or elitism or anything
like that. I just think that's the way it's mapped
out by society. I know for myself, and I'm a
bio major, and I spend a lot of time learning
equations, and I don't learn English language, so the things
that I'm learning I communicate with people that communicate in
my language, but I don't communicate in theirs necessarily. And
I think that's a reflection of how the society is
becoming more specialized and diversified. And when you have specialists,
when you have people going into different fields, they are
going to be talking different languages. And I don't know
what the basic English language is that people want to
teach anymore. Dr. Jasper Neel is the Director of English
programs for the Modern Language Association in New York. He
has also taught composition at the University of Tennessee and
at Baylor University. Dr. Neel, how do you react to
those two points the last two students were making, the
ethnic background and the sort of technological specialization points? Well,
I think there is no question that someone from an
ethnic background where what we would call standard, upper-middle class,
white English is not spoken, is at a disadvantage when
he goes to college and has to write upper-middle class,
standard, white dialect in that he's not simply putting cosmetics
on a face that already exists, he's got to develop
a new face in more ways than one. The metaphor
works in a lot of different ways. To the second
person I would say that probably what he means is
that in his chemistry courses, or his biology courses, or
his math courses that he can assimilate the information that
the teachers give him and communicate it back to the
teachers in a form that the teachers can decipher, that
he can tell them what they already know. And I
would contend that writing is telling someone who doesn't know
what you know what you know. And so, someone who
can only speak to those people who already know what
he knows has got no real skill at all in
writing. But there's another more important thing that needs to
be brought up, and that is the word crisis. I
think that sometimes raises a false sense of insecurity throughout
the country. If we mean by crisis that college students
and high school students don't write as well as we
wish they could write, then certainly we do have a
crisis. But if we mean by crisis that something dramatic
has happened then we don't have a good sense of
historical perspective. For example, in 1960, 55% of all colleges
and universities offered remedial writing courses. In 1967, just ten
years ago, 93% of all colleges and universities, and I
don't even include two year colleges in this. All colleges
and universities required at least one term of composition, and
77%, or well over 3/4 required a whole year. So
the aberration from the norm is not that we are
finding ourselves required to have remedial writing and required composition
in college today. The aberration from the norm was in
the late 60's when we chose to abolish those requirements.
Yeah. Well, why are people so upset now? One of
the reasons that they are upset is because of the
reports of the national tests. For example, the SAT does
not, as it was administered in the most recent past,
does not include a writing sample. And while you can
probably predict to some degree how well a student can
write by giving him a multiple choice test, determining how
well he writes entirely by multiple choice test would be
a lot like determining how well he can ice skate
by multiple choice test. The only real way to find
out whether or not he can ice skate is to
give him some skates and send him out on the
ice. The only way to find out whether or not
he can write is to give him a pencil and
ask him to write. So that while the nationwide tests
do have some effectiveness, and they are very useful, we
shouldn't be too concerned if people don't do well on
multiple choice tests. Is it your impression with your own
historical perspective that, on average, students in college and high
school are writing as well today as they did in
the 50's or the 40's or whenever? I'll have to
plead ignorance there. I don't know how students wrote in
the 50's and the 40's. Certainly not in the 40's.
I wasn't even born until 1946. I've only taught composition
for six years, and I...You were the one who
introduced historical perspective, and I wonder if you had a
premise for...Ah! I see what you mean. My premise
there is this. Composition was required in the 40's, and
that remedial writing was offered in the 40's. Yale had
its awkward squad way back in the 20's. And if
there was required composition, a year of required composition, and
if over half the colleges offered remedial writing, I would
presume that those people who read the writing of college
students assumed that they needed required composition and that many
of them needed remedial composition. I see. While there is
disagreement about the nature and extent of the college writing
problem, there's no disagreement about the need to improve the
teaching of writing. Colleges are beefing up their composition courses.
Cornell University recently appointed its first Dean of Writing. But
remedial medicine at the college level may be too little
too late. The Bay Area Writing Project tackles the job
of teaching writing skills in the elementary and secondary schools.
James Gray is director of the project. He founded the
program three years ago at the Berkeley campus of the
University of California. Mr. Gray, does your program assume bad
teaching or just a lack of background in English at
home? I don't think it assumes either. There are causes
for the writing problem, but we try to address what
we can, do something about it with the project, and
that is the quality of the teaching in the schools.
From the amount of writing that teachers are given as
they move in through the colleges and become teachers themselves,
there is very little training of teacher composition. If the
English major is a major primarily in the history of
literature, we do not really teach composition skills to elementary
teachers as widely as we should. Secondary teachers are trained
as literature teachers. College professors are obviously trained in the
history of literature. There's been a neglect in the training
of the English teachers. Now, the way we try to
attack this is we try to identify those teachers in
the elementary schools, middle schools, senior high schools and colleges
who are having some success teaching composition for whatever reason,
and the teachers who are successful approach it in a
variety of ways. We bring these people together as a
core for five weeks in the summer time, and we
train them as consultants by having them teach each other
what they know...about the teaching of composition and have
them write a great deal themselves, feeling that the English
teacher at any level ought to be if not master
of the craft at least practicing it constantly so he
is aware of what he is asking students to do,
aware of the problems students face when they are asked
to write. What do the successful teachers of English composition
do that the unsuccessful ones don't? What do they emphasize
and what's the difference? The one thing I've been able
to point out over three or four years of the
project that seems to identify all of the successful teachers
is that they seem to know why they're doing what
they are doing. Their courses have pattern, have focus. You
can look back and see sequence. They come at it,
as I said, in various ways. Some will emphasize grammar;
some will emphasize diction; some will emphasize writing to audiences;
some will emphasize point of view. But the emphasis is
something that they're passionate about. They know why they are
doing what they're doing, and that seems to be what's
important. Right now I wouldn't say that this approach is
necessarily better than this approach. I see. It's making it
seem important to the students as well. If the teacher
has that passion it'll come across to the students. Obviously
there is a great deal of writing going on in
all of these approaches. Where does the chief lack seem
to be in students' writing skills that these teachers cope
with? When we look at papers at Berkeley--we look
at a lot of papers of entering freshmen--it seems
to me that most of the errors are really errors
of lack of experience. Lack of experience in writing, not
of life. Lack of experience in writing. We can put
failing papers in two piles. One pile, the smaller of
the two, indicates seemingly to me with papers that start
out, "I am a 17 year old boy, and I
will write from the point of view of a 17
year old boy," or "This paper is true for 12
reasons." The poor kids have not had much experience writing
about ideas on paper with words. The other paper, the
other pile, larger, is papers filled with gross error. But
even there, looking closely at the kinds of errors, we
get a sense of what it is they haven't been
working with. They haven't been working with their minds. They
might have been asked to write a great deal, but
we want them to not only write, but write also
about ideas. We're trying to get a movement. They haven't
been forced to address and manipulate abstract ideas? Enough. It
seems to be a lack. I'm not going to say
that we shouldn't start necessarily, you know, old fashioned, strict
kind of essay, 500 words essay every Friday. We're trying
to get a way to have the students become writers.
We're going to have them tap their own experiences. We're
going to move them from that, writing about experience to
writing about ideas. If we can make that kind of
separation there, and that's an awkward one. But writing some
assessment about or some analysis of; movement to analytical prose
seems to be missing. Thank you. Jim? There is much
discussion and disagreement over how writing skills should be taught.
Hit grammar hard as in the old days when MacNeil
and others were in school, or aim for more organization
and coherence of thought and so on. Students have their
own thoughts about what is important too. I think grammar
is essential to good writing. I mean if you can't
express yourself in an articulate, clear fashion, using the language
as it is meant to be used, then I don't
think you are using the English language well. Grammar is
important, but it's not as important as learning to get
your ideas down. It's more important to know how to
write, you know, your feelings and then correct the grammar
and the spelling. They're trying to find a happy medium
between giving the old, you know, routine, structural doctrine of
grammar and having a new, sort of individualized and more
liberalized approach. There's got to be some in between place.
You know you can't have it so dogmatic that the
student is going to get turned off, and you can't
have it so free and easy that the student just
doesn't do anything. Gentlemen, let's explore some of the ideas
that those three students raised. Beginning with you, Dr. Scanlon.
The first student said that grammar is essential to good
writing; the second one said grammar is not as important
as learning to get your ideas down. Where do you
come down? Well, it seems to me that you can
make an accommodation between the rubrics, basic rubrics, basics of
the language, and writing itself. The research in the field
seems to indicate fairly clearly that the teaching of formal
grammar may end up with the student knowing far more
grammar, but it does not inevitably transfer into the student's
own writing. There is growing...You mean there is evidence
that says that there is no correlation between knowing grammar
and writing well. Very little correlation, and in comparison to
the amount of effort expended, the effort might well be
expended better in another way. And in fact that other
way is to work functionally to work through the writing
process itself. In fact the real problem with student writing...
Excuse me. How can you do that, Doctor, if you
don't have a basic knowledge of the grammar or the
basic knowledge of the language to use it? Most students
have some rudimentary knowledge of the language. They have it
largely from the community in which they grew up. They
get some of it from school. They get it from
the media. They get it from various places. If you
start students writing, you can work with their own writing,
with something that means something directly to them; ask them
to clarify it. Teach them about some of the basic
forms of expression. In fact, from my own point of
view, the basic problem with student writing is that students
do not have a sense of the potential of the
language, and the potential of the language really doesn't come
in being able to identify an adverbial clause. The potential
of the language comes in being able to write well,
and that means sentences. That means coordination, subordination and bedding
in sentences. That means paragraphs, being able to work deductively
and inductively in paragraphs. It means organizing essays as a
whole. But if you start with the writing you can
work to the grammar, to the usage elements of the
language through the writing. If you start with the grammar
quite frequently what you do is you end up with
the grammar. In fact a study that I did last
summer would seem to indicate that even those students who
score very high on the ACT, English portion of national
testing, 27 ACT English scores are in a position where
good grasp of grammar and usage does not provide them
with good writing skills, with good and varied sentence structure,
with a firm sense of paragraphing, with a firm sense
of the logic of the essay as a whole. How
do you feel about that, Dr. Neel? Well, I agree
with Dr. Scanlon almost wholeheartedly. There is a fairly even
split between teachers of composition as to how one can
approach it. The first and the oldest and perhaps the
most widely adhered to school is that an idea can
exist in the abstract, and that there are many different
ways that the idea can be embodied; that the writer
has a choice of a lot of different ways to
express his idea. And the other approach is--that first
approach I suppose could be called rhetorical dualism. The second
approach is sort of a psychological monism that an idea
is inseparable from the way it's expressed. I think you
are going to have to explain that for me. What...
Pardon? Those two terms. I'm sorry. You lost me there.
What I mean by dualism is that an idea can
be expressed in more than one way. Okay. Monism, that
it can only be expressed one way; that the idea
itself is inseparable from the language. The way it's expressed.
I see. Right. That the writer as he writes is
refining and clarifying the idea. And there is another thing.
You seemed to be a little bit incredulous when Dr.
Scanlon said you could teach writing without having taught grammar
first. That shouldn't be so surprising because the words themselves
should tip you off. Composition is really the process of
composing, and the fine point of grammar is an analysis.
And so you're asking the student to do two different,
mental processes, the first one first. You want him to
analyze before he has composed. It's sort of like dissecting
a cadaver before it exists. The two of them are
rather different processes. Well, right. We were talking about the
teaching of it, but my basic exclamation was to the
point that you had to have these tools before you
could actually use the language. I mean, to express an
idea you got to know what the words are, and
what order to put them in; some basic things. Right.
Everyone has an idea of how to use the language
when he goes to college. In fact everyone who goes
to the first grade can already talk, and so we
already have a basic grasp of grammar. The point is
what do you mean by grammar? Do you mean by
grammar that when someone writes he must know never to
link two, independent clauses with a comma; always to have
a coordinating conjunction? Do you mean that when in the
objective case one should always use whom? For example, you
wouldn't say to your wife, "With whom are we eating
tonight?" She'd look at you like you were crazy. You'd
say, "Who are we going to eat with?" Right. Let's
go to Robert MacNeil who is probably even more incredulous
than I am. Robin? Churchill said, "That is the kind
of pedantry up with which I will not put." Some
argue that with so much electronic communication these days, the
telephone, television and everything else, that writing may be becoming
an obsolete skill for the average person to perform or
function in this society. Do you believe that is happening
at all? I wouldn't be running this project if I
felt that. Writing is a way of knowing, and writing
is as close as we can get to teaching students
how to think. We have a potential in the American
school system of almost all students possibly being able to
go on to college. Certainly going on to college you
need to write to be able to survive. The junior
colleges are filled with students who are some of them
dropouts from high school up to 16 years of age.
We've got people coming to college now that we couldn't
predict when they were in the schools. They don't have
to now. To make it in the job world, business
in this country still, I'm sure, is taken care of
with the essay. We are processing more paper than ever
before. We hire people on the Berkeley campus in affirmative
action programs, and they are locked into certain low paying
positions or bottom paying positions unless they can write. The
day will never come as long as we have minds
and as long as we have education that writing will
not be paramount. It hasn't been. I mean it's given
short shrift. For the first time we have an emphasis
on the need for composition in this country. In my
25 years of experience we haven't trained teachers to do
it, and we are just beginning to do it. There's
a crisis. No wonder there is a crisis. We have
never really attacked the problem before. Do you sense at
all, Dr. Scanlon, the need for language among many people,
the need for literary skill, the ability to write clearly,
is actually declining or degenerating, because they can make do
with other modes of communication? Not at all. In fact,
there is increasing evidence that quite the contrary is true.
What we find from the business and professional worlds is
an increasing demand that the people they hire be able
to express themselves clearly and concisely. I do a lot
of teaching of engineers, and the engineer who graduates from
the University of Illinois is likely, in fact, to move
from the field position into a management position in fairly
short order. When he moves, or she moves into a
management position, somewhere between thirty and seventy percent of the
time, and the higher you rise in the structure the
more writing you'll do, so that even in the highly
technical field where sometimes I think we assume the computer
has largely replaced the written word, that we find that
those people who are going to be professionals in that
field are going to have to write. All over the
country, in fact, we see law schools, their great concern
for writing and their students; medical and dental schools, I've
seen some evidence recently which indicates that they have begun
to increase the amount of writing which they expect from
a student when he comes to medical or dental school.
It's almost ten hours. These are new movements and new
directions in the field. I don't have the kind of
experience that Dr. Gray has, but I certainly have been
able to see in the nine or ten years that
I have been involved in composition an increasing awareness of
the importance of the written word and that people be
able to write reasonably well even in technical fields. Yes,
but Dr. Neel, don't you feel--if you can answer
this briefly--that the electronic media of communication are making
it easier to avoid using writing? There's no question about
that now. Now I would agree that people do need
to know how to write, but you've got three English
teachers here, and that's sort of like asking Carter if
the world needs little pills. Of course we're going to
say people need to know how to write. That's what
we do for a living. And I think that the
process of writing is good for people, and it helps
one learn how language is used, and it makes one
not likely to be taken advantage of by a corrupt
politician or the mass media. But nevertheless...I have to
ask you to leave it there. I'm afraid this mass
medium is out of time. Thank you very much in
Washington. Good night, Jim. Thank you here. Jim Lehrer and
I will be back tomorrow evening. I'm Robert MacNeil. Good
night.
