content
Good evening. And Happy New Year! I'm Jim Lehrer. On
the NewsHour tonight two ways to remember 1996, as a
banner year for gene research and how it looked to
some editorial cartoonists, plus a Richard Rodriguez essay about somebody
named Madonna. It all follows our summary of the news
this holiday. There was violence in the West Bank town
of Hebron today. An off-duty Israeli soldier fired into a
crowd of Palestinian civilians. At least five Arabs were wounded
by the attacker who lives in a Jewish settlement elsewhere
on the West Bank. The shooting occurred as negotiators were
trying to conclude an agreement on the withdrawal of Israeli
troops from Hebron. We have a report from Robert Moore
of Independent Television News. Within seconds of the shooting Israeli
soldiers pounced on a Jewish settler, forcing him to the
ground after he had fired his assault rifle directly into
Hebron's crowded marketplace. The settler, who is also a serving
soldier and was in uniform, was raced from the scene
for his own protection. There were fears that Palestinians would
seek immediate revenge for this attack. It is the latest
bloodshed in a city that is on the verge of
a transfer of power. As the wounded were taken away,
the attacker admitted he had wanted to sabotage the Hebron
peace agreement. Sporadic violence broke out across the city this
afternoon. Palestinians, who under the imminent Hebron deal are poised
to gain self-rule, say there can never be peace while
the Jewish settlers live in their midst. Israeli security forces
identified the gunman as 22 year old Noam Friedman, who
was drafted five months ago. Friedman was wearing a military
uniform at the time of the shooting but had not
been assigned to duty in Hebron. Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu
immediately phone Palestinian leader Arafat to condemn the shooting. President
Clinton also called Arafat to offer his condolences. Israeli and
Palestinian negotiators went ahead with today's talks on Palestinian control
of Hebron. On the Peruvian hostage story seven more captives
were released from the Japanese ambassador's residence in Lima today,
including four Japanese citizens and three Peruvians of Japanese descent.
A Roman Catholic bishop, who has been a frequent visitor
to the hostages, announced the men would be freed. They
left the residence on a bus for a police medical
center. The terrorists holding the remaining 74 hostages have demanded
the release of 300 of their comrades from Peruvian jails.
In this country today there was more bad weather in
the Northwest. Heavy rains hit Northern California. The National Weather
Service predicted disastrous flood levels for the Russian and Napa
Rivers North of San Francisco. Temperatures rose to a record
54 degrees in Seattle, melting snow and causing mud slides.
Washington Governor Mike Lowry declared a state of emergency in
19 counties. At least 11 deaths have been blamed on
the weather. Property damage in Washington, Oregon, and California is
estimated at up to $250 million. The weather did not
affect the 108th Tournament of Roses Parade in Southern California.
An estimated 1 million people were there in Pasadena to
watch the parade that had the theme "life's shining moments."
The event began with a B-2 flyover, followed by the
traditional procession of flower-laden floats. Among them was a float
celebrating the kingdom of Thailand which won an award for
outstanding showmanship. And that's it for the News Summary this
New Year's Day. Now it's on to gene research, a
cartoonist's view of '96, and a Richard Rodriguez essay. We
begin tonight with a look at what has been a
banner year for gene research and on tape we go
to our business correspondent Paul Solman of WGBH-Boston. He prepared
this assessment last week. What makes us tick and what
makes us sick? Gene research is literally about the stuff
of life, and this year saw major new advances on
the scientific and commercial front. We begin with this background
from Fred De Sam Lazaro of KTCA-St. Paul-Minneapolis. Seven years
ago cystic fibrosis, a degenerative lung disease of children, was
traced to its genetic foundation. Scientists were able to identify
a gene that, when defective, causes cystic fibrosis. The discovery
by a team of scientists led by Dr. Francis Collins
was widely acclaimed. Isolating a single gene from the 80,000
or so found in every human cell was the equivalent
of locating a house somewhere between California and New York,
with no clue as to the street address or even
the city. Cloning the cystic fibrosis gene was really a
great leap forward and in cloning technology, and it was
a huge and laudable effort. And a lot of those
techniques are still certainly, you know, applicable to today. University
of Minnesota geneticist Dr. Scott McIvor says since the cystic
fibrosis breakthrough shortcuts have been honed and developed to sift
through the complex maze of DNA. Individual genes, the basic
building blocks that determine every aspect of life, are not
only numerous, each consists of tens of thousands of precisely
sequenced bits of protein called bases or nucleotides. The DNA
samples are loaded here where you see these teeth sticking
in. Today, new techniques have allowed scientists like Dr. Alexander
Kamb to screen DNA samples in search of genes. There’s
a laser here which excites the fluorescent dyes, and that's
internalized in the computer, displayed here as an image in
color, and so you can see now the result of
that, all these little ladders here, little bands corresponding to
different bases in the nucleotide sequence. And if a person
has, for example, a mutation at a particular position and
a particular gene, this kind of analysis will tell you
that. Meanwhile, under the auspices of the federal government's Human
Genome Project now headed by Dr. Francis Collins, the entire
genome is being mapped. Scientists across the world add to
this database when they locate a gene. Those who want
to study the genetic basis of the disease now have
access in journals or on the Internet to a growing
road map that can lead them to candidate genes, providing
either a general location, like which of the 23 chromosomes
the gene is on, or a more precise address. The
analogy in this case would be that the chromosomal assignment
would tell you which state it's in, and the much
more fine structure map that's provided by the Human Genome
Project, and eventually the sequence would give you an actual
street map, or an even house-to-house map. Pursuing that analogy
further, once McIvor has located a house, he can then
start to look for burned out light bulbs, defects or
mutations in genes, like missing or wrongly sequenced bases, the
kind of things that lead to disease. Doh is working
with a retroviral vector that she's been engineering for treatment
of a disease called Hurler Syndrome and the idea is
to use this retroviral vector to introduce a functional gene
and hopefully, if we can use this retrovirus to introduce
a functional iduronidase gene, then we may be able to
correct the disease conditions in Hurler Syndrome. A little transplant
that's happening. Right. A gene transplant. McIvor's is one of
several labs that have taken the next step to gene
therapy, trying to find a way to reintroduce functioning genes
to take the place of faulty ones. We don't really
have the capability yet to go back and turn on
specific light bulbs again, but we may be able to
plug in an extra light bulb somewhere else that would
illuminate the area that needs to be illuminated. And restore
function essentially. Right. Although gene therapy has shown promise in
limited trials, most scientists agree it's in early infancy, years
away from clinical application. For now, the big news has
been in the discovery of genes. So far nearly 1/4
of the genome, 20,000 genes, have been located, most of
them just identified, others linked to traits or conditions ranging
from obesity to anxiety. More importantly, mapping has been used
to locate 78 crucial proteins that are directly linked to
diseases. In 1996 alone, 21 such disease genes were identified
responsible for certain forms of Alzheimer's, diabetes, and skin cancer,
among others. Last month scientists located markers, the approximate location
of a gene linked to Parkinson's Disease, and in another
significant find one responsible for certain forms of prostate cancer,
one of the most common causes of death in American
men. She had breast cancer first at 29 and then
again at 39. Also in 1996 building on the discovery
earlier of genes linked to some breast cancers tests became
commercially available to screen women for the genes and, therefore,
their predisposition to these breast cancers. Now to our discussion.
Dr. Francis Collins, as we've just seen, directs the Human
Genome Project, officially known as the National Center for Human
Genome Research. Mary Jo Ellis Kahn is a patient advocate
with the National Breast Cancer Coalition. Steven Holtzman is chief
business officer of Millennium Pharmaceuticals, a biotech firm in Boston,
and Patricia King is a professor on law and medical
ethics at Georgetown University Law School here in Washington. And,
welcome to you all. Dr. Collins, let's start with you.
How significant a year was it in terms of genetics
and why? I think it's been a remarkable year. At
the basic science level, the Human Genome Project which started
in 1990, past its sixth birthday, able to claim victory
with the genetic maps that were the first milestone for
the project well ahead of schedule. The physical maps that
we needed are also probably about 96 percent done. We
finished--Physical maps means the city level, the state level.
The physical maps you can think of as sort of
chunks of DNA, the road maps of the cities and
counties that you need to achieve that house-to-house search that
you eventually need to get to if you're going to
have all the games in front of you. The sequence,
i.e, the series of the letters, the A, C, G,
and T, i.e., that four-letter alphabet of DNA, of all
of the human DNA is now the part that we
are rolling up our sleeves and wading into. And there
are 3 billion letters in that particular instruction book. That’s
what Fred was looking at with the guy in the
computer, looking at--Right. Coming out of that colored ladder
on the screen. If you printed out the entire human
instruction book in books with average font size and page
size and piled them one on top of the other,
it would be about the height of the Washington Monument.
And so far we've only done about 1 percent of
that. But seven or eight years from now we'll have
done it all. Mr. Holtzman, in terms of what we've
done in terms of commercial breakthroughs, we've seen genes for
I think there's novelty-seeking even, somebody said, anxiety, things like
that. How big a breakthrough in a commercial sense has
this year been? Well, as little as two to three
years ago, there was a common belief that genetics would
be important only for relatively rare disorders which are called
single gene disorders, such as cystic fibrosis. What's happened in
the last year to year and a half is a
recognition that genetics is essentially a tool, genetics and genomics,
as it's called, for elucidating the underlying biological causes of
disease, including the most major forms of common diseases, our
susceptibility to them, and elucidating the causes of the progression
and initiation of those diseases. That kind of understanding provides
the basis for starting to develop drugs which can address
those diseases at their underlying cause, and not just gene
therapies but early available drugs of the type that major
pharmaceutical companies are interested in. Are we close to getting
those kinds of drugs? Have we begun to get them?
No, we haven't even begun to get them. What we've
begun to get is the kind of understanding that allows
us to begin to think about developing medicines which can
actually prevent and cure disease for the first time, as
opposed to only palliating symptoms. And as a result, the
pharmaceutical companies have made significant investments in young biotechnology companies,
such as Millennium, who've made early investments in this technology.
Okay. Ms. Kahn, how big a year from the consumer
or patient point of view? Well, it's been a wonderful
year for great potential. There's a potential that we will
find out the secrets of breast cancer enough that we
can prevent or cure it, but we're not there yet.
And from the viewpoint that we are in--breast cancer
patients are in grave danger at the moment because we
have not put in place the policies that we need
to protect us from discrimination. "We," so you mean you
are a breast cancer patient? I am a breast cancer
patient with a family history, and I have two young
daughters, and although finding out our genetic status may be
very useful to the family to learn who needs to
be followed more carefully and what medical care we should
receive, it's too dangerous at this point because my daughters
could lose their health insurance based on just testing. And
that's the kind of issue that these breakthroughs raise, right,
Professor King? That's correct. This has been a banner year
but it's not unusual at all. The resolution of some
of the legal and ethical problems really lag far behind
the scientific breakthroughs. So we're still trying to work out
the policies not only for clinical screening but for an
introduction of new tests for general use. But we have
bigger problems like health insurance, keeping information private and confidential.
We have problems with discrimination. We have potential problems with
discrimination in the work place based on one's genetic traits.
So we have a lot to do, I think, but
I'm hopeful because major breakthroughs have a way of crystallizing
the public mind to tackle these kinds of issues, and
that may be what we needed. Let's go back to
the issues in a minute, if we could. There are
a couple of questions I just have personally. For example,
Dr. Collins, how close are we, do you suppose, in
years to a major breakthrough on the aging process? I
say this out of some personal concern here. I mean,
are we at the point where we could begin to
think about reversing or making headway on the aging process?
It's always hard to answer these questions about how far
are we away. We have certainly made strives in understanding
aging, actually from a genetic point of view. A relatively
rare condition called Werner's Syndrome, which is one of these
premature aging disorders, had its gene found this year. And
that is probably a window into a process that's been
pretty obscure until now. Certainly when it comes to some
of the diseases of aging, such as Alzheimer's and prostate
cancer, there have been breakthroughs this year. But in terms
of understanding the process by which everything sort of wears
out and runs down, that is going to be a
very difficult process. And I don't think we're anywhere near
to that fountain of youth model that some people hope
for. Yeah. That's what I was hoping for. I'm sorry.
Mr. Holtzman, average longevity for a kid born in the
year 2000, for example. I mean, I don't--we'll never
get back to you on this, but do you think
we're going to have substantially increased longevity say for kids
being born in the next few years? Not in the
next few years. I think, as Dr. Collins indicated, if
we look at what gets in the way of longevity,
namely certain diseases of aging, we will have insight into
those and better drugs for treating those. What about cancer?
We're talking here about breast cancer specifically. I think the
cancer rate has for the first year gone down in
terms of survival. That's a five-year survival rate still, or
no? No. That's mortality statistics across the population for a
number of cancers for the first time this century have
begun to decline, not entirely clear all the reasons for
that, but obviously not declining nearly fast enough to suit
most of us. Cancer is an area where I think
the potential for advances in the next ten to fifteen
years are really quite substantial because cancer comes about because
of mutations in DNA. We are learning a lot about
mutations in DNA, and we should be able to harness
that into the development of more effective therapy in the
not-too-distant future, but we're not quite there yet for most
of the common cancers. So that's why you're happy. What
exactly are you worried about? I mean, explain to us
what you mean when you're worried about knowing things for
you and for your children. Well, until we have in
place a treatment that goes with genetic testing where we
can say that there is obvious benefit, and everyone agree
you should be tested, you should get this treatment, then
what we're left with is a lot of information, powerful
information, that may or may not improve our quality of
life. Currently there is a cancer, a breast cancer test
available of some sort? Well, there are two genes that
are--if you have a mutation in them--are associated
with an increased risk of breast cancer. But it's not
clear in everyone who carries a mutation what your risk
is. It's not clear at what year you'll get breast
cancer if you do get it. There's a lot of
things unknown still, but there is a test, and in
some high risk families where there are lots of members
affected by breast and ovarian cancer it might be useful
to know if you carry one of these mutations. But
since you can't prevent it, and you can't cure breast
cancer in every incidence, then what you really need to
do is provide a way to do the research. And
if we have discrimination as a major risk, women will
not be able to participate in these studies. We can't
get to a decreased mortality. What do you mean by
discrimination? I'm not following? Well, our biggest risk right now
is health insurance discrimination. And if the health insurance industry
were able to say for those people who can be
tested for breast cancer, colon cancer, Alzheimer's, any number of
diseases that we'll soon have tests for, that from birth
you are no longer eligible to buy insurance, then you
will have a genetically disadvantaged population who eventually could die
of these diseases simply because they can't get care. So
you wouldn't take the test, you haven't had your kids
take the test? My family's decided that it's not in
our best interest because my daughters and my niece, the
next generation, need their health insurance more than they need
this information. So it's not out of fear of finding
out the results; it's out of the health insurance, the
worry about health insurance? Yes, absolutely. And Patricia King, how
do we deal with that? I mean, is that the
major issue that's raised by genetic testing or screening? Well,
it's one of the major issues. It's not the only
one. But not only does it present problems for individuals
because the information is powerful, not only do you have
a problem in getting health insurance, you may have a
problem getting employment because remember, most health insurance in this
country is provided for by employers. Health insurance is expensive.
So you not only have to worry about your coverage;
you have to worry about your employment; and you have
to worry about what to tell your children or, indeed,
whether to have children. So the information is quite powerful.
And this information feeds on existing inequities in our system.
We can't currently protect persons who know they are at
risk for certain diseases or, in fact, have certain diseases
with respect to health insurance or even employment. We're just
beginning to come to grips with this problem. We can't
yet assure you that the information, should we get it,
would be protected and kept confidential. So it's not only
an individual problem; it's a huge social problem that feeds
into a system that already has problems, not to mention
that if we actually can do something for people who
are screened one day for breast cancer, we can't assure
some people that they will have access to the health
care system at all, not with just with respect to
insurance, but because they may not be able to afford
it. So this is the tip of the iceberg in
terms of our social problems. Dr. Collins, how do researchers
deal with these issues? I think many researchers are deeply
concerned about this as well. I certainly am. I think
it will be a terrible tragedy if this set of
scientific advances with so much promise to benefit humankind gets,
instead, converted into a new way to discriminate against people
in an ever more powerful and unfair fashion, and the
whole field ends up, therefore, stillborn as the advance in
medicine that we would have wanted it to be, that
would be the greatest tragedy. I think there is some
movement, though, in addressing these issues. Only a few months
ago, the Kassebaum-Kennedy Health Insurance Bill was passed and signed
by the President. It does say that at least in
some circumstances health insurance companies may not use genetic information
to deny coverage. It has areas that it doesn't cover
which seriously need to be addressed quickly, but in this
past year, there were no less than a dozen bills
in Congress that dealt with genetic discrimination and privacy. And
I suspect in the 105th Congress there will be at
least that much interest. But it's--the time is now.
We have to wait this time for a crisis, for
a catastrophe for everybody running around, wringing their hands, saying,
how did we get to this point, that will be
so unnecessary and so tragic. I want to ask Mr.
Holtzman, how do you respond to this from a business
point of view? For example, there's this breast cancer test
that's being sold in Utah. Do you think that a
company should be marketing a breast cancer test, given the
little amount we know, and the potential for discrimination that
currently exists until such legislation would come in? Well, I
think the first point to make is the industry has
taken a stand completely consistent with the scientific community stand,
as represented by Dr. Collins. The Biotechnology Industry Organization was
highly supportive of taking position papers in support of the
Kennedy-Kassebaum legislation as an active Bioethics Committee supporting these sorts
of anti-discriminatory--discriminatory and anti-privacy kinds of issues. But not
everybody in the industry, for example, I assume. Well, I
think it's--the organization which represents the biotech industry. Personally,
I have the great fortune of serving on the National
Bioethics Advisory Commission, and this is a major issue on
our plate, as well, and we are addressing. Clearly, we
have a stake as an industry and as people who
have gotten into this industry because we believe in the
power of the technology to ensure better technological sophistication is
not disserved by our social--lack of social maturity and
the misuse of it. Please. I wanted to ask one
last question. I didn't mean to cut you off, but
parental screening is an issue that I'd read about and
heard about, the idea that you could prevent a kid
who--as I say--who had some propensity to be,
I don't know, anxious, too anxious, and you didn't want
that kind of kid, or homosexual, or some of the
things that we felt about with respect to possible involvement
of genes. That's an issue we haven't talked about here.
Patricia King. Well, first of all, let me say, we
already have some capacity to screen fetuses prenatally for pretty
severe diseases. Down's Syndrome. Down's Syndrome, sickle cell anemia, for
example, so this won't be new; it will be magnified.
And one of the--Magnified hugely, wouldn't it, if you
could tell all kinds--That's exactly right. You have a
lot more screening tests for fetuses. You have magnified your
issues, and you've magnified them in the following way. We
think of Down's Syndrome as being a very serious disease,
sickle cell as being serious. Some of the characteristics that
we could potentially screen for in the future some of
us might not think of as being so serious that
we should think about not having that fetus. So one
of the things that I think about with respect to
genetics is not will it--not only will it change
our immediate lives in a way that we have to
think about but it has the potential for changing where
we see ourselves, our parent-child relationships, what we want from
our children, what we tell our children. Now, I agree
with Dr. Collins. I don't think I should go around
crying tears about what is to come. I think the
real challenge is to try to figure out ways to
take on effectively some of these issues, and I think
that we have sort of laid a groundwork in the
last six, seven years, but we really need to have
more concentrated, I think, national attention to deal with some
of the big social issues. We're dealing with in a
piecemeal fashion--health care in the Congress, states are passing
their own laws to deal with discrimination. They are doing
it piecemeal. We need a more concerted look at the
immediate issues and how they affect individuals, but some of
the broader social issues. In the past the President's Commission
on Ethics in the early 80's did wonderful work with
respect to big issues then and helping to educate the
public and prepare us for the technology. We need something
like that again. We need a broader group to take
a look at some of these issues. And I take
it--because you're nodding, Ms. Kahn--that you fully agree
with this? Oh, absolutely. I think it's very hard for
policy to keep up with the rapid pace of science.
And we need a better method of doing that. But
in part, it's educating the public about how to think
about this, rather than thinking in terms of designer children
and how you make a perfect child with genetics, we
really need to be thinking--in my family it's not
that the person's not valuable; it's that the disease is
very bad. We need to treat the disease. And if
we try to generalize too much--and I think that's
where the discrimination comes from--that just because you have
one mutation in all of these billions of genes that
that does not change the person. And so we really
need to keep focused on what kind of treatments we're
looking for. And that's that genetic determinism that you're dead
set against, isn't it, Dr. Collins? Which I'm very concerned
about. We hear about the gene for this and the
gene for that. And if you're talking about something like
anxiety or novelty seeking, good grief, this is ridiculous. Those
are personality characteristics which have genetic contributions that are enormously
complex. No single gene would account for more than a
tiny fraction of such characteristics, and much of that is
learned behavior that comes about as we're growing up as
kids and interacting with our environment. And I'm deeply concerned
that in our enthusiasm--and I'm certainly enthusiastic--to promote
what genetics can do for us in the medical sense
that we are also geneticizing other aspects of human behavior
to the point where people begin to conclude that every
aspect of what they did today was controlled by these
invisible marionette strings made of the double helical DNA. That
ain't so. We're not going to eliminate free will. We're
not going to eliminate the environment, even when we understand
the whole genome. Excellent. Well, then with free will I
say it's the end of the discussion. Thank you all
very much. Still to come on the NewsHour tonight cartoonists
on 1996 and a Richard Rodriguez essay. Now to a
second and very different view of the year that just
ended. It was recorded earlier by Elizabeth Farnsworth. We look
back at 1996 through the eyes and drawings of four
editorial cartoonists: Michael Ramirez, of the Memphis Commercial Appeal and
USA Today; Steve Kelley of the San Diego Union Tribune;
Doug Marlette of Newsday; and Ann Telnaes of the North
American Syndicate. Thank you all for being with us. Steve
Kelley, was this a good year for cartoonists? Oh, by
all means it was. We had a lot of unusual
events that sort of percolated to the surface. Plus, it
was a--it was an election year. So election years
are always like an all-you-can-eat buffet for a political cartoonist.
So we had all of those issues and, in addition,
a lot of sort of unusual one-day wonders I call
them. Like? Well, for example, the kid reached over the
wall in one of the playoff series and snatched the
ball, and Roberto Alomar spit on an umpire, and Jonathan
Prevett kissed a little girl on the cheek at school
and was sued for sexual harassment. He was in the
first grade. So those were all very ripe subjects for
political cartoons. Was it a good year for you, Doug
Marlette? Oh, yeah. An election year is always good, and,
you know, actually most years are good. It feels like
we're talking about a wine. You know, it was a
vintage year for cartoons. And, of course, it was a
good year for you. It probably wasn't a good year
for everybody else. That's exactly right. That's one of the
ironies of our business is in the chuckles racket as
we call it, but you know, bad times for the
republic are good times for cartoonists. So we are--we
had a good year. The election made it especially easy.
When I say easy, I mean that there are so
many topics coming at you, you end up drawing those
one-day wonders because it's such a relief not to be
drawing on the candidates. That's one of the reasons. You're
looking for something else. Ann Telnaes, how about for you?
Was it a rich year for you? Oh, it was
a great year for cartoonists. It was actually the first
time I had followed an election in my cartoons from
the primaries on. So I found it very interesting. I
mean, I loved drawing Bob Dole. I just--I'm kind
of very sad that he's gone now because he was
just such a wonderful character, and that Dole-speak was just
priceless. It offered a lot for us to work with.
Michael Ramirez, how would you rate it if you had
to rate this year on a scale of one to
ten? Well, I think it was pretty much near the
top. I think it's close to ten. Election years always
seem to be like Christmas all year around. And when
you have a multitude of candidates that garnered about as
much enthusiasm as watching the Rose Bowl seven times in
one day, or the Rose Bowl Parade, that generates great
editorial cartoons. And I think here we had a classic
election where neither candidate really generated much enthusiasm and, therefore,
they made great cartoon fodder. So I think it's been
a terrific year. Michael, let's look at one of your
cartoons from the elections and talk about it for a
minute. Here we have a bridge. Both ends of the
bridge are falling apart. On one end it says "Clinton
Bridge to the Future," on the other end "Dole Bridge
to the Past." And "Voters" in-between. Looking back, is this
how the elections still strike you? Yeah. I think I
pretty much characterized it literally how the voters felt about
the candidates. It seemed that they were kind of stuck
in this montage of the same old campaign rhetoric with
two candidates that didn't really represent what they're saying. And,
therefore, they didn't really have good choices. And I just
took the two campaign statements that both Bob Dole and
Bill Clinton use and just kind of fashioned it into
the cartoon where the voters were just stuck with no
real choice. Ann Telnaes, what's most memorable as you look
back now on the elections? I think the importance of
the moderate voter. I did a lot of cartoons regarding
that. Okay. Let me interrupt one second. Let's put one
up. Here you have Sen. Dole leaning towards I guess
a moderate voter, saying, "I want you to know I'm
very tolerant," but he's playing footsie with somebody to his
right, a woman who's labeled "Far Right." Yeah. That was
at the point in the campaign where the Dole team
finally realized they were really behind in the polls with
women voters, and, you know, they started trotting out a
few moderate Republican congresswomen to tell everyone how tolerant the
party actually was. And, you know, if you followed anything
from the primaries on with Pat Buchanan and Bob Doran,
you had to kind of laugh at that. I found
it very amusing, so that was the reason I did
that cartoon. Doug Marlette, how about you? The First Lady
and Mrs. Dole, who wanted to be First Lady, gave
you some laughs, didn't they? Oh, yeah. Both First Ladies
were terrific for us. They were more interesting than the
candidates. Let's look at what you did with it. Here
we have a cartoon. This is the Doles in bed.
Mrs. Dole is completely dressed, and she's speaking into a
microphone, and the Senator is saying, "Give it a rest,
Liddy!" Yeah. This is right after the convention. Before we
go on, let me just look at one more, and
then we'll talk about him. Here we have the Clintons
in bed, and the President looks kind of like Franklin
Delano Roosevelt, and Mrs. Clinton is saying, "Eleanor says to
knock it off, Bill!" Let's start with that one. Tell
us about that one. Well, you know, first of all,
you always want to draw the candidates in bed, whenever
possible. There's a rule for political cartoons; that it humanizes
them, or you know, in the bathroom, any of the
human parts of the house. But, you know, with Hillary
saying, "Eleanor says to knock it off, Bill," that was
after the election, and Clinton had won, was looking like
Roosevelt, and this whole thing fascinated me of Hillary Clinton
becoming this new age, talking to Eleanor Roosevelt, and I
couldn't help but associate to Nancy Reagan, who is another
one of the kind of rigid seeming, you know, dominatrix
kinds of First Ladies who always seem to have these
weird fascinations with the occult and with, you know, stargazing
and astrology or--you know, I enjoyed going at something
from the side of pulling out an old issue and
bringing it up. But having the wives of both candidates
were really interesting. As a matter of fact, what I
found most interesting was how Clinton, the genius of this
election, and the victory this year was of Clinton finding
Hillary to carry his problems with Whitewater and then Dick
Morris to carry that, you know, that kind of part
of him that is more--how would we say--promiscuous
part of the President. And so he found designated, you
know, problem folks who served as lightning rods, so he
kind of got off the radar, and these people were
seen that way. I did a drawing after the Morris
thing where Clinton is saying, you know, "Imagine my surprise
when it wasn't me." Before we go on to your
cartoon, Steve Kelley, this idea of putting the candidates in
bed or in some intimate kind of setting, does everybody
find that that's funny, or is this just your own
peculiar--You know, basically we tend to idealize candidates and
presidents, and part of the role of the cartoonist is
to humanize. Do you agree with that? In addition, one
of the few true advantages that political cartoonists have over
say photographers or columnists is that they "can" put the
candidates in bed. I mean, no photographer could go in
and snap a picture, a columnist might describe it, but
not nearly as well. I mean, we can depict the
President or First Lady in bed, if we want, and
I think that alone is--it just startles the reader,
and it's interesting just to see what someone--how someone
would conceive it. It's very startling, I agree. Yes, go
ahead. Our job as editorial cartoonists is really to point
out that politicians are fallible, that they do make mistakes.
I think it was kind of interesting that Doug had
FDR there. I think the Social Security outlays that they
predicted in 1980 were $1.3 billion. They missed it by
$290 billion. So we get to put 'em in a
situation where they might not be to show the people
that they're more human, the politicians are more human, and
that they are fallible. And that's the whole point of
editorial cartooning. Steve, sticking with the elections, looking back, the
scandals gave you quite a bit of fodder. Well, the
trouble was keeping up with the scandals. I mean, especially
in the White House, I mean it seemed that they
came virtually every week. And it was almost--Excuse me
one second. Let's look at this cartoon. Here we have
the White House with the sign outside that's sort of
like the sign outside a bank. It says, "Time 1:17,
Temperature 85 degrees, Current Scandal: FBI Files." Right. That was
just the current scandal. I mean, that was the fourth
in a long series of scandals. And, you know, this
was--it was almost like a shell game that the
White House, or it seemed like that, like they were
trying to--okay, well, everybody is talking about this scandal.
Now, quick, start another fire over here, and let's--we'll
get 'em talking about that, and before they can really
get any meat there, then we'll send them over to
another one over here. It was--you know, and also
very good fodder for, for cartoonists, just, you know, any
presidential scandal at all is great, but to have, you
know, to have a six-pack is, it was nice. Okay.
Let's look at four cartoons now on other issues, and
we're going to go through these one at a time.
Here's Steve Kelley's take on Roberto Alomar, the Baltimore Orioles'
player who spit on an umpire, and there's the umpire
in his deep sea diving gear. And next, we see
an Ann Telnaes cartoon on the First Lady. There's the
elephant, sitting and reading a bedtime story. He says, "And
the bad, uppity woman was forced to leave Washington in
disgrace, while the angry white males breathed a sigh of
relief and lived happily ever after." And the males in
bed are saying, "Read it again! Read it again!" And
next, we have a Doug Marlette cartoon. This is about
drugs and the baby boomers: "My folks warned me about
the dangers of drugs, but they may have been having
an acid flashback at the time!" And then finally, we
have a Michael Ramirez cartoon about violence on TV: The
mother's saying, "Son, your Father and I have decided not
to let you watch TV anymore because it promotes violence..."
And the son's saying, "Touch my remote and I'll kill
you..." Michael Ramirez, how did you--what made you decide
to do that cartoon? What does it? What comes to
your mind? Well, you know, it's the irony in daily
life that I think makes the best cartoons. In this
case, you know, obviously parental guidance is well and good
in making sure that your kids are watching what they're
supposed to be watching, but does television violence really affect
our children? And I think the question was answered obviously
by the kid exhibiting violent behavior. And I think those
kind of ironies in real life, they tend to be
great editorial cartoons. Is that what moves you too, Ann,
those ironies? Yes. It's usually something I've been thinking about,
something that I've been thinking about for a while. And
somebody will, you know, say something or have a press
conference that just sounds so absurd to me that I
just have to do a cartoon that minute. And the
one that you showed, you know, that was a result
of the fact that Senator D'Amato had just finished the
Whitewater hearings, and they had called a press conference, and
it just seemed so absurd to me. They had all
these white men standing up there, all these Republican white
men, and each one took their turns in bashing Hillary
basically, and, you know, you just, you feel compelled to
do a cartoon about it. And you want to show
them in the most ridiculous light possible. Is that the
way it works for you, or do you have a
different inspiration process? You know, I think it's just, you
feel these contradictions, you know, and showing them the cartoon
about the baby boomer, the children of the baby boomers
talking about drugs, we live in such a "feel good"
culture, and it's drug-oriented, and approaching--you know, now baby
boomers are dealing with their children--you know, "Did you
do drugs, Daddy," you know, "What was it like at
Woodstock?"--having to deal with that, and I could have
done a cartoon saying--I could have done the same
drawing and had the--had the kid saying, you know,
my parents warned me about drugs, but I don't know
if it was them or the Prozac talking. And Steve
Kelley, what about the Alomar cartoon, did you do that
right away after the spitting incident occurred, or did you
think about it for a while? Well, it ran a
couple of days afterwards. What I try to do is
determine essentially what people are talking about at lunch that
day and let that be sort of my guide for
what I address, and the great thing about that is
people actually are looking for a cartoon on the subject.
I mean, I'll many times have people say to me,
I was wondering what you were going to do about
this event. And like with the Alomar event, it was
so out of the ordinary that a professional baseball player
would spit in the face of an umpire, of authority.
And so everyone was focused on that, so any cartoon
that I drew about it not only was going to
receive a lot of readers, a lot of people were
going to look at it, but they were expecting it.
They wanted to know what I was going to say
about that, and when the cartoon came out, I got
a lot of phone calls on it, people who were
very happy about it. And then again we can't in
television or print journalists can't talk about the umpire, you
know, putting him in some kind of a deep sea
outfit. Well, once again, it gets back to the strength
of political cartooning, which is you can create something that
could never appear in physical life really. No photographer could
have taken a picture of that. It was purely a
cartoonist's creation. And there's also an element--and this is
the art of cartoons I think--is that if you
can hit like with a certain inevitability where a cartoon
is so natural that people feel like, of course, and
you're saying it for them, that's what you're kind of
looking for. It's harder--it's hard to find those ideas,
but that's what you're really after, like a hole in
one. Ann, which of your cartoons was the most controversial?
And by that, I mean which one inspired the most
reaction, letters, outcry? It was the working woman holding the
fan, and it was making the mud go back on
the Hillary bashers. We're looking at it right now, and
you can see the woman is labeled "Working Woman." Right.
I put my E-mail address on my cartoons, and I
get a lot of reactions that way. And that cartoon,
that got, you know, a very pro and con reaction.
I mean, some people were like, good for you, you
know, we're so tired of this bashing, and the other
side, you know, I had people writing in, you know,
we bash Hillary because she's a liar and proceeded to
call her many, many names and proceeded to call me
many names, and it created quite a response. Which was
your most controversial cartoon? Anything that I do on the
O.J. Simpson trial seems to be--seems to get me
a lot of mail. I did one of Simpson as
a pilgrim. And this was if O.J. had been a
pilgrim, and he's saying, I didn't do it. You know,
people always, they call up and they're angry that you're
second-guessing the work of a jury. They say, you know,
I guess you think you know better than these 12
people, and I typically go, yeah, as a matter of
fact, I think I probably do. Do you all like
it when you get these kind of responses? I mean,
do you like it when do one that gets lots
of mail? Yes, certainly. Yeah. That's a sign you've been
very successful. Absolutely. Yeah. And to the meaner the responses.
You know, it's easy to do that. You can get
response. But getting response when people--when you placed it
where you want it, like a good tennis serve--and
getting the reaction, that means you're being effective. Michael Ramirez,
which was your most controversial cartoon? My most controversial one
this year was I had a piano with the keys
separated. I had the black keys on one side and
the white keys on the other side. It was kind
of an offshoot of the O.J. Simpson trial, and sort
of racial tension that's evolved in America. And it was
titled "Playing the Blues," and it sort of talks about
the resegregationist movement that we have, kind of multiculturalism versus
fractionalization. You know, getting back to--Excuse me just one
second. Why do you think this one elicited so much
response? Why was it your most controversial? Well, you know,
being in Memphis, Tennessee, politics is very volatile to begin
with, but then when you get the racial element into
any equation, it becomes much more so. So any time
you start raising the issue of race, it seems to
drive the telephones and bring in the hate mail. And
in this case, it's an area of sensitivity in our
community because of course Dr. Martin Luther King was assassinated
in Memphis, and so any derivative subject in race will
bring a lot of criticism. And I interrupted you. You
wanted to say something else. You know, editorial cartoons are
sort of a mirror of events, though. I mean, we're
pretty much, you know, politics by its nature is very
volatile. So, the hate mail that we get, we wear
'em sort of like medals, you know. If we do
generate hate mail, if we're getting criticism, if we're getting
phone calls, then we're doing our job. What was your
most controversial cartoon, Doug? You know, I had no controversial
cartoons this year. I had had so many before this
year that I got the year off. But I thought
when you were going to ask us what was the
most controversial subject or topic, which was for me, was
who was the father of Madonna's child, that was the
controversy that riveted me. And the second thing was, who
was the father of Michael Jackson's child? But you did
also do a cartoon on race, did you not? Yes,
I did. That elicited a lot of response. Yes. Describe
it. I think we can see it now. This actually
got a positive reaction, as opposed to the--You can
see the church burning and it's, "In my day they
just burned the cross!" Right. I got a lot of
positive reaction, actually, on this cartoon, and this always surprises
me. You never know. You get used to hate mail
and petitions that you be fired and, you know, but
sometimes things hit, and you can get positive reaction. It’s
interesting. You never know. And it's always interesting. Is that
true for all of you, you just can't predict it?
No. You can't. And when you don't get a reaction,
then you're kind of I guess it really didn't generate
any discussion, so, yeah, you want that reaction. Steve, what
are you sharpening your quill for, thinking of next year?
Against whom are you sharpening your quill? It's interesting. Every
time I take a vacation from work--I took off
a week for Christmas, and inevitably, some big news event--
you just wait for that. It's one of the laws
of the cartoonists' universe. And I guess Newt Gingrich's mea
culpa will eventually, I will be drawing cartoons about that
and certainly about the second term, the Clinton second term,
and I guess the line-item veto is now going to--
that will be a different spin on the budget process.
How about you? Whenever there are subpoenas in the air,
you know, you know it's going to be a good
time for cartoonists. But, you know, we all set our--
as a matter of fact, we watch for when Steve
is going to go on vacation because we know that
a big topic is coming--is coming down the pike.
Ann, what about you? What are you thinking about for
next year? Probably China, China and Hong Kong I think
I'm going to be doing a lot of cartoons. I
try to do them now, but I think the editors
will be wanting them this year, and also, well, the
scandals, that'll be nice. That will be something good. And
Michael Ramirez, briefly. Well, I think, you know, the Clinton
administration is going to be a lovely topic of conversation
for years to come. When I went to vote for
him, I couldn't decide whether to vote for national security
or job security. And I'm sure in the next year
they're going to provide lots of cartoon fodder. Well, thank
you all very much. We'll look forward to seeing your
cartoons next year. And thank you for being with us.
Happy New Year! Finally tonight essayist Richard Rodriguez, editor of
the "Pacific News Service," has some thoughts about a new
movie and its star. "Eva, Eva," chanted the crowd. Eva
Peron was for a time in the 40's and 50's
the first lady of Argentina, the most famous woman of
her time. Forty years later "Evita" is a movie starring
Madonna, the first lady of American rock. The American rock
star and the Argentine populist heroine, both lives are linked
by odd similarities. Eva Peron was born Marie Eva Duarte,
the illegitimate daughter of a seamstress and a rancher in
rural Argentina. At 15, Eva Duarte traveled alone to Buenos
Aires, there to begin an undistinguished career as an actress
and singer. When she met Juan Peron in a night
club, he was twice her age, an army colonel with
an admiration for Franco and Hitler. Madonna is a celebrity,
famous not so much for her singing voice or her
acting talent as for her ability to keep modeling and
remodeling herself. She has become a female icon for a
fierce determination to keep changing. Look at the crowds that
come to see her perform. Crowds at rock concerts now
are the most extraordinary crowds in the world. Politicians all
over must look at such audiences with envy. What politician
in the world today can command this sort of audience?
Eva Peron knew such crowds. Fifty years ago, Argentina was
hers. Argentina has always struck me as a country in
search of a nation. In the 19th century European settlers
wiped out nearly all trace of the Indian from the
land. Even Luis Borges, Argentina's greatest writer of this century,
blind Borges used to laugh at what he supposed was
the Indians' backwardness. Such a sad land. For most of
the century Argentina has flirted with strong men of the
left and the right. Lacking a democratic tradition, Argentina was
readily romanced by a strong man's promise of order, "orden,"
that most luxuriant of words in the political lexicon of
Latin American Spanish. Whereas, rock music is America's hymn to
disorder, rock is democracy on speed, do your own thing.
To that extent rock music is anti-political and necessarily skeptical
of the established order. When Elvis Presley visited Richard Nixon's
White House, the two men seemed from different planets. Rock
music is less about saying something than about unsaying it.
Country music, by contrast, even thuggish rap music communicate with
narrative. The most interesting idea I've ever heard Madonna express
was a necessity of striking a pose. Eva Peron became
a genuine populist heroine. She was of the poor, and
they, she grandly insisted, were of her. She had no
ideas. She had only a set of sentimental speeches everyone
had heard several times. While Juan Peron arrested journalists and
political rivals, Eva became a political heroine whose fame derived
from dying her hair blond and wearing Christian Dior. With
a beautician's help and a hairdresser's skill, Evita was a
golden fairy godmother to a yearning Argentina. In Buenos Aires,
as in every town and village throughout Argentina, there is
mourning for the First Lady of the land, Eva Peron.
She died young, at 33, from uterine cancer. In death,
Eva Peron became a saintly relic. I am only a
simple woman. In the 1970's, Eva was resurrected as "Evita,"
a pop opera by Andrew Lloyd Weber, which is where
we find her now, "Evita," the movie, played by Madonna,
the rock singer whose most astonishing achievement is reinventing herself.
In early December Bloomingdale's opened Evita boutiques in all of
its department stores. Here, you could buy Evita lipstick, dresses,
jewelry, all to create "the look." "Don't cry for me,
Argentina." Perhaps because of the restrictions women have lived with
for centuries it would necessarily occur to a woman to
realize the importance of costume and image. And yet, there
is something very terrible and very modern about the bottle-blond
fame of Eva Peron and Madonna. It is possible now
in our celebrity-obsessed world to become very influential by merely
striking a pose. "Don't cry for me, Argentina." I'm Richard
Rodriguez. Again, the major stories of this holiday, the terrorists
holding hostages in Lima, Peru, released seven more this evening.
No explanation was given for the release. An Israeli soldier
fired at shoppers in an Arab market in Hebron, wounding
five people. He said he wanted to sabotage the handover
of Hebron to the Palestinians. And a powerful New Year's
Day storm hit Washington, Oregon, and Northern California. Heavy rains
and high winds caused flooding, mud slides, and power outages.
We'll see you online and again here tomorrow evening. I'm
Jim Lehrer. Thank you, good night, and Happy New Year.
