content
Good evening. Leading the news this Tuesday, CIA Director Gates
called the Soviet Union "dangerously unstable." There were reports and
denials of Soviet President Gorbachev's plans to resign, and the
Mideast peace talks resumed in Washington. We'll have the details
in our News Summary in a moment. Judy Woodruff is
in New York tonight. Judy. On the NewsHour tonight, the
highly publicized rape trial of William Kennedy Smith is our
first focus. Should it be shown on national television? And
what effect will it have on other women who charge
they've been raped? We have four views. Then Kwame Holman
has a documentary report on the industry that keeps tabs
on your credit rating. CIA Director Robert Gates said today
the situation in the Soviet Union was dangerously unstable. Although
there was no threat to U.S. security, Gates said there
was a great potential for internal unrest. He spoke before
the House Armed Services Committee this morning. All of the
former Soviet republics face enormous economic, social, and political problems
that will make the transition to democracy in a market
economy difficult and potentially dangerous. The economy is in a
freefall, with no prospects for reversal in sight. Severe economic
conditions, including substantial shortages of food and fuel in some
areas, the disintegration of the armed forces and ongoing ethnic
conflict will combine this winter to produce the most significant
civil disorder in the former USSR since the Bolsheviks consolidated
power. U.S. Ambassador to the Soviet Union, Robert Strauss, said
millions of Soviets were unhappy and frustrated. He also raised
the possibility of a military coup, saying no one had
heard yet from the Soviet army. He said they remained
a wild card. In Moscow, there were conflicting stories today
about whether President Gorbachev would resign. The reports came a
day after Gorbachev rejected the Minsk agreement which forms a
Slavic commonwealth from three Soviet republics. We have a report
by Gaby Rado of Independent Television News. Mr. Gorbachev's office
said he held meetings as normal inside the Kremlin today,
but nothing could hide the fact that the President has
not been seen in the flesh for more than 48
hours. And the speculation about a possible Gorbachev resignation heightened
when one of his closest and most trusted advisers, Georgy
Shakhnazarov, speaking to young politicians forum, let slip his own
opinion in answer to a question. As for your view
that he will have to go, that is your right
to think like that as representatives of parties with your
own positions. As I understand it, the situation's such that
one probably wouldn't have to wait too long for it.
Later, Mr. Shakhnazarov claimed his remarks had been misinterpreted. It
only meant that Gorbachev's fate depended on the fate of
the union. But it was enough for the President's official
spokesman to be bombarded at a news conference with inquiries
about his boss's future. As for the question of how
often President Gorbachev is thinking over his possible resignation, I
can say that presently he is not thinking of resigning.
And there was influential backing for Mr. Gorbachev's stand against
the Minsk agreement from inside the all union foreign ministry.
I am very much afraid that we are beginning to
witness something whose consequences cannot be predicted by anyone. There's
no justification for the division of an old commonwealth which
took decades and centuries to form. I must say this
very frankly. President Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan, sworn into office today,
also gave the Minsk agreement the cold shoulder. He announced
that rather than join the new commonwealth, he'd prefer his
vast republic to go it alone without the Slav nations.
At the same time, the split in the former Union
deepened, with the parliament and the Ukraine, which last weekend
declared itself independent, voting by a massive majority to endorse
the Minsk agreement. The parliament in Byelorussia followed suit. President
Kravchuk of Ukraine accused Mikhail Gorbachev of wanting to keep
his personal power intact, while simply talking about political reform.
But tonight a group of demonstrators backing the union gathered
near Red Square, claiming that the three Slav presidents had
effectively carried out another coup d'état. They waved red banners.
The great irony is that on street level the beleaguered
Mr. Gorbachev is now only finding support from the hardline
wing who were in former times his natural opponents. In
Yugoslavia, the federal army renewed its attack on the Croatian
town of Osijek. Croatian officials said the Serbian-dominated army began
the shelling just after dawn this morning. United Nations officials
hope to send a peacekeeping force to Croatia, but U.N.
Secretary General Perez DeCuellar said yesterday a total cease-fire must
be in place first. Judy. The second round of Middle
East peace talks began today in Washington. Israeli delegates participated
in three separate sets of meetings with delegations from Syria,
Lebanon, and a joint Jordanian-Palestinian team. After this morning's session,
Israeli and Palestinian representatives said their discussions were stalled over
procedural differences. The Palestinians say they now want to meet
separately with the Israelis instead of jointly with the Jordanians.
Freed hostage Terry Anderson arrived back in the U.S. today
accompanied by his six-year-old daughter and her mother. He was
greeted by a large crowd of news reporters and cameras
at New York's Kennedy Airport. Anderson was freed last week
after more than six years of captivity in Lebanon. The
nation's foreign trade deficit rose to $10.5 billion in the
third quarter. The July to September deficit followed two quarters
of trade surpluses caused mostly by contributions by U.S. allies
for the cost of the Gulf War. President Bush talked
about trade and other economic matters on a visit to
Chicago today. He repeated his concerns about high unemployment and
slow growth, but he said there were positive developments such
as increased U.S. exports. He said free trade was an
important factor in reviving the economy. He spoke at the
Chicago Mercantile Exchange. Free and fair trade means more jobs
for Americans and we must not pull back into some
isolationistic sphere listening to the siren's call of America first.
And we need to stand together against that call from
the left and against that call from the right to
stay within ourselves. We owe the world leadership and they're
going to get to it from this President. Patrick Buchanan
announced his candidacy for the Republican Presidential nomination today. The
53-year-old conservative columnist and television commentator did it in Concord,
New Hampshire, before a group of supporters. Buchanan said his
candidacy will be aimed at working people of both political
parties. He said President Bush had broken his promise by
raising taxes after saying, "Read my lips, no new taxes."
The U.S. Supreme Court today struck down a New York
state law which confiscated profits made by criminals for books,
movies, and other materials describing their crimes. The law required
that the money be given to the crime victims. In
a unanimous ruling, the court said the law violated freedom
of expression. One of the country's largest credit reporting companies
today settled a lawsuit with 19 states and the Federal
Trade Commission. TRW was accused of violating consumer privacy and
inaccurate credit reporting. The settlement requires the company to change
its procedures and provide credit reports within four days to
consumers who ask for them. TRW maintains credit histories on
more than 170 million Americans. Burmese opposition leader Ansan Suchi
today formally received the Nobel Peace Prize. She remains under
House arrest in Burma and could not travel to Oslo,
Norway, for the ceremony. The prize was accepted by her
two teenage sons. Her eldest son said his mother accepted
in the name of the men, women and children who
continue to sacrifice their wellbeing, their freedom, and their lives
in pursuit of a democratic Burma. The 46-year-old activist has
led Burma's democratic reform movement since 1988. Today hundreds of
pro-democracy students demonstrated in the Burmese capital, calling for her
release. That's it for the News Summary. Just ahead on
the NewsHour, fallout from the William Kennedy Smith rape trial
and a documentary report on the credit reporting done on
all of us, how accurate and how private. The rape
trial of William Kennedy Smith is our lead tonight. Today,
the defendant, the nephew of the late President, John F.
Kennedy, and of U.S. Senator Edward Kennedy, told a jury
in West Palm Beach, Florida his version of what happened
on a beach there last March. But jury members weren't
the only ones listening to his testimony. The trial and
the events leading up to it have received widespread media
coverage. From the start, the trial has been a graphic,
even brutal, national lesson in how the criminal justice system
works. Whatever the charge, evidence is needed for a conviction
so evidence as specific as the accuser's dress and underwear
were examined and passed from juror to juror. The experts
gave their dryly factual descriptions about grains of sand and
semen spots and torn stockings. The bra was in very
good condition. I didn't note any defects or tears or
any stains of any sort. With reference to your background
in examining clothing submitted on behalf of individuals who have
alleged sexual battery, in how many instances have you found
any damage to any bras in those examinations? Very few.
These are things that might come up in any rape
trial, but this is the nationally televised trial of William
Kennedy Smith, accused of raping a woman at the family
estate in Palm Beach last Easter weekend after an evening
of drinking. Last Wednesday, the woman making the accusation took
the stand to tell her story to the jury under
the questioning of prosecutor Moira Lasch. Was the penis inside
your vagina? Yes. Did he ejaculate? Yes. Did he say
anything else to you? I don't know. How long -- is
there any way you can estimate how long he spoke?
I don't know. Did it appear to you that he
had any difficulty in entering you? Yeah. Was that painful
for you? Yeah. Because the trial has been covered live
by TV, an international audience got to hear the accuser's
detailed allegations. Her face was hidden by an electronic screen,
as required by Florida law. She described how Smith had
met her at a bar, danced with her, taken her
to the Kennedy compound, taken her walking along the beach,
kissed her, then tackled her and assaulted her. What do
you mean by the word "tackle?" I was running and
he hit me from behind and had me on the
ground. Did he ever remove your underwear? No. Were you
able to scratch him at all? I don't know. I
got my hand down there. I was trying to get
him out of me and I don't know if I
got him scratched or not. That entire account and much
of the evidence supporting it underwent a close and frequently
grueling cross-examination by Smith's lawyer. I think you told us
yesterday that you said that your left arm was pinned
down, is that correct? Yes. You said that your right
arm was pinned down. It was pinned between us. You
said that his chest was on your chest holding you
down, correct? Yes. You say that he was at the
same time pulling up your dress? He was pushing my
dress up. And then he was able to push your
panties aside, and I take it you mean by pushing
the crotch to the side? I don't know he did
it. He just, he did it. At the same time
he was able to enter you while unable to obtain
an erection? I -- all I know is he had me
down, he pushed my dress up, he pushed my panties
aside, and raped me. But your description of it is
that you have your right arm pinned, right, you have
your left arm pinned, right? My right arm is pinned
between his chest and my chest. And he's pushing down
on you? Yes. At the same time he can pull
up your dress, he can hold your panties aside, and
he could enter you without being able to obtain an
erection? I don't -- he raped me. Thank you. Throughout the
first week's testimony, Smith, himself, remained a calm, silent figure
seated at the defense table. Today he got his turn
to testify and his was a very different story than
the one given by his accuser. Well, she unbuttoned my
pants and I took her panties off and, with her
help, and, and we embraced and I put the towel
down on the lawn and she took off her panties
and, uh, uh, and she, we were necking for a
while and she was massaging me and I wasn't excited
and she put me inside of her and we started
to -- she said to be careful -- and we started to
make -- have sex. Whatever the jury decides, the issue of
so-called "date rape" has been brought to the attention of
millions of Americans in the past week or so. We
examine the impact of the trial and of its coverage
now from four different perspectives. Ellen Hume is the executive
director of the Shorenstein-Barone Center on Press & Politics at
Harvard University. Ann Lewis is a political analyst in Boston.
Steven Brill is the president and editor-in-chief of Court TV, which
has televised the trial daily since it began. And Susan
Xenarios is a clinical social worker and director of the
Rape Intervention Program at St. Luke's Roosevelt Hospital in New
York City. Steven Brill, first of all, how large an
audience, television audience, is watching this trial? You Court TV,
the cable channel is televising it. CNN is also televising
it. Do you have an estimate on how many people
are watching? Well, CNN's been doing large parts of it.
We've been doing it gavel to gavel, the way we
do most trials that we cover. I don't have any
guess, except that CNN's ratings, their normal daytime ratings, which
aren't that high normally, have gone up and we think
ours are higher than they usually are, though during the
day since we started in July, we've been getting very
high ratings with everything we've done. Well, I read the
other day, for example, that your channel reaches into what,
more than 5 million homes in the United States and
CNN reaches some 50 some million homes -- Yeah. -- so potentially
millions of people are watching. Oh, sure, that's right. Why
are you televising this trial? Well, for the same reason
we televise trials all over the country every day, 24
hours a day, that is what we do. We are
a cable channel that attempts to bring the justice system,
the civil justice system, the criminal justice system, to people
so that they can watch it, so that they can
be enthralled by it, and maybe even learn something by
watching it. We do swimming pool accident cases. We do
lots of criminal cases. Our goal is to demystify the
system. Our goal, I might add also, is to go
beyond the sound bytes, the lurid sound bytes that we
just saw just now. But is there something additional about
this trial because it's a Kennedy family member involved that
has made you interested in it and CNN? You'd have
to ask the people at CNN. This is the first
trial I've known they've ever covered. We cover all kinds
of trials. We cover trials involving famous people. We cover
trials involving people that you and I have never heard
of. And what purpose do you think it serves for
you specifically to be broadcasting this one? This one? Hmm
mmm. Here we have a trial where everybody comes to
their television set understanding who the people are and, indeed,
what the issue is. And by showing the actual trial,
I think we've provided more of a lesson in the
burden of proof, in the standard of beyond a reasonable
doubt, and the whole issue, as you pointed out, of
date rape or acquaintance rape than people would get if
they stacked a bunch of civics textbooks on their head
and tried to read all of them. Ellen Hume, what
purpose do you think is served by televising this trial
nationally? Well, I think it gives an opportunity for people
like Steven Brill and for CNN and all news organizations
to get a big kick, a big circulation in viewership
hit. News has become entertainment and what's more entertaining, despite
the down side, it creates even more victims than might
be there in the courtroom, but it's very entertaining to
look at the rich and the powerful getting into trouble.
And if sex is involved, then naturally it's going to
be even more exciting for these people. A lot of
what we do, our gavel-to-gavel coverage, isn't nearly as entertaining
as PBS's selection of these very lurid sound bytes. We
do the whole trial, the boring stuff, the stuff that's
very interesting, and we are a news organization. We are
a news organization covering the legal system that is second
to none. We are run by people who publish legal
publications that are second to none. And the fact that
it's entertaining, I'm not sure what Ellen means by the
difference between entertainment and news. Maybe she can help us
with that. Ellen. Well, clearly, I'm not saying that it's
your fault that you're broadcasting trials. I think that's probably
going to be a very interesting and good channel. I'm
talking about the news judgment when people want to devote,
perhaps CNN, want to devote a large amount of time
or space in the newspaper to a trial of this
nature that isn't really advancing anybody's knowledge of anything, clearly
they're doing it because it's scintillating, it's salacious, when, in
fact, we're not devoting that kind of space to the
Noriega trial, to the S&L crisis. I'm not talking about
you. I'm talking about news judgment, news gatherers, television and
print. And I think that there's a question of what's
left out when you decide to give something like this
this much attention. Well, you can't televise the Noriega trial
because cameras are not allowed in federal criminal courts. If
we could, we would be there ahead of this trial,
absolutely. And I think, as Ellen says, and much of
what we're talking about here is not so much, it's
part certainly what Court TV is doing, because your channel
is devoted to covering trials like this, but also what
CNN and what so many other news organizations are doing.
Ann Lewis, as someone who is interested in politics and
in the coverage of politics, what contribution do you think
is made by the coverage of an event like this?
Well, look, the issues of sex and power have been
attracting public attention since the Iliad began, with perhaps the
abduction of Helen by Paris. When you add to that
the fact that this involves, as we've just heard, names
that we've all been hearing about and reading about, that,
of course, contributes to public interest. But I think this
trial became a subject of public discussion long before the
cameras started rolling, as soon as the first stories appeared
in print. There's no question in my mind that we
as a nation have spent more time as individuals in
a workplace, at home, talking about issues like relations between
men and women, talking about what is date rape. I
am encouraged, I think, that there is higher sensitivity to
these issues, that there is more concern about what is
involved, about how widespread this may be, so that whatever
the outcome of this trial may be, as in some
other recent public events, I think we're all getting a
little education today on changing currents. But you don't see
that there's anything out of kilter with news coverage in
general? I mean, we have, after all, an economic recession
underway in this country. We have momentous changes happening in
the Soviet Union, and yet, of course, we're devoting the
discussion on this program tonight, but you have, again, the
live coverage, the extensive coverage of when these other things
are taking place. Ellen. Yes, that's exactly right. I think
that it's true that it's not only crowding out other
coverage, but there's an important point. In the old days,
the Lindburgh trial and all these other wonderful scandals that
made so much hey day for the press, the press
didn't have the same role in society that it does
now. Television and print press have become essential to the
way our society receives its news about government. The church
and the town crier don't have the same role they
used to. It's now television that is our glue, our
community, our culture. And when something is on television, it
distorts the process enormously. And I think that while I
wouldn't bar a trial, I think we have to have
a free society. We have to be able to broadcast
these trials. But I think that the news judgment in
carrying them to the extent that they have been is
skewed and is really a problem. Steven Brill. I would
love to know why the networks and CNN thought it
was necessary to carry the Clarence Thomas-Anita Hill hearings when
the subject was Long Dong Silver, but not when the
subject was the Constitution. We did both. This is what
we do. We do this for a living. So we,
so our news judgment, you can compare the trials we
cover, should we cover this, should we cover that, but
we covered the murder trials in El Salvador. We'll cover
this. We cover high profile trials and try to teach
people something, as Ann pointed out, by virtue of the
high profile trial. We lure people in and then try
to teach them. Ann Lewis, what about that point, that
there's something out of kilter, something unbalanced about news coverage
in all this? Well, I wonder if there is. If
we could, for a moment, think about a dinner table
with our friends and relatives and half the dinner you
are discussing the breakup of the Soviet Union, which is
really extraordinary, none of us has ever seen an empire
dissolve before our eyes, and the second half perhaps we're
talking about the Palm Beach trial. To the first, we
can only talk as spectators about what we are watching
thirdhand. To the second issue, we bring our own life
experiences. We all have, if not experiences just like this
one, we can talk about what we know, again, because
it comes so much closer to home, because we may
have children that have gone away to school that we're
concerned about. It seems to me it comes closer, it
is a different level of concern and we should not
be surprised if those different human reactions also get reflected
in news coverage. It's all one society. But does televising
a trial, Steven Brill, affect whether justice is done in
a case like this? I mean, is what we're discussing
totally separate from what happens with the outcome of this
case? There are lots of issues here. The fact is
that there are 46 states that will have cameras one
way or the other and in each of those states
they experimented first to see if the lawyers would ham
it up, would the judge react differently, would jurors be
intimidated? In every case after the experiment, they went forward.
I think one of the great lessons of this trial
is that we have a judge who clearly isn't hamming
it up. She clearly is behaving the way we'd want
any judge to behave. The lawyers clearly aren't hamming it
up. Whatever else you want to say about Moira Lasch,
the prosecutor, you would be hard pressed to say that
she's acting in a flamboyant way because the camera's there.
She is as dull as she can be. It's clear
the cameras haven't had any effect on her or on
Roy Black. Then the issue is whether a victim of
something like a rape will come forward. And we have
tried to deal with that I think responsibly by, as
your viewers saw, by blocking out the name and by
blocking out the face. We've done the same thing with
the jurors. We haven't revealed the names of the jurors,
even though we know them, even though Florida law very
much allows us to do it, because we don't want
those people intimidated. And, again, you made the point as
we were watching the tape, our tape, just before this,
I said in that report that the reason the victim's
face was blocked out was because of a Florida law,
and you've just corrected me and said that -- That law
has been overturned as unconstitutional. Indeed, it is unconstitutional. So
it's the decision of the news organizations to block -- We
have voluntarily decided at Court TV to block that out.
All right. Susan Xenarios, as someone who sees women day
in and day out who come in and who say
that they have been assaulted, been sexually assaulted, what effect
do you think this has? Well, I know that many
of them are very, very disturbed. We see many survivors
of date rape in our program. They will not come
forth. And I think watching a trial like this can
really be a detriment because I do disagree with Mr.
Brill, I think that there are, this is not a
typical rape trial, No. 1. I have testified on many
rape trials and I have been present in many rape
trials and, for instance, with undergarments being displayed in the
courtrooms, that is not necessarily the normal state of affairs.
Reports, forensic reports, are given. They are not publicly displayed.
I think that women who are contemplating prosecuting and taking
this into the criminal justice system, they will really think
twice. Yes. I have to say I hear what you're
saying and I sympathize with it, but -- and maybe Ann
Lewis will agree with me on this -- but the most
striking thing to me about the William Kennedy Smith trial
is that all the myths about the horrid, horrible persecution
of the alleged victim when she's on the witness stand
and is cross-examined by the defense counsel just haven't happened.
The judge very carefully proscribed -- let me continue -- what the
defense counsel could ask. That questioning was tough. We saw
that it was tough. But it did not go into
the kinds of things in her personal life. It did
not attack her in a personal way, the way mythologically
we think is going to be the fate of alleged
victims of rape. And I think, if anything, watching that,
some victims might be encouraged to come forward, because it
wasn't as bad as they heard it is. Susan Xenarios.
I hear what you're saying and I think that they
have been on basically good behavior, however, there have been
an enormous number of expert testimonies that I think were
tremendously irrelevant, you know, to the case. I think that
things were allowed in the courtroom that would not normally
be considered to be appropriate or relevant. In other words,
showing the undergarments and so forth? Yes. I think that's
very denigrating. It's very humiliating. It's another way to rape
to this woman. She is totally -- It's one rape. We
don't know if she was raped the first time. That's
correct. Right? That's correct. The allegation. That's a very important
point that we should not lose -- I'm not disagreeing with
that. I'm just saying that your point is that what
we're seeing, even though there has been a measure of
restraint on the part of the prosecutor and the defense
and so forth, there still is -- These are very difficult
cases to prosecute and they are very difficult cases to
experience as a victim of a rape, a date rape,
or any rape. And I think what this has shown
is the intrusiveness and the psychological violation and certainly, you
know, she was, although she was able to explain her
trauma, and I think in a very articulate way and
why she remembers some things and doesn't remember other things,
everything she said, every behavior she had is examined under
a microscope. And that not only is hard enough in
a courtroom that is private, let alone in international television.
And you're saying that makes it harder for women who
are out there? Absolutely. Ann Lewis, how do you respond
to that? Well, I wonder, as I was listening, I
certainly understand this issue of psychological violation. I've got to
say as someone who've been reading, working towards better treatment
of this whole issue of rape, we know that victims
of rape, women who've had this problem, have been concerned
for years justly because, for example, they were afraid that
past sexual behavior would be used against them. I mean,
rape has been the one crime where if you'd had
sexual relations with someone, supposedly you were less able to
protect yourself against rape, as if you could ever borrow
money or let someone borrow money from you, you couldn't
complain if they came back and stole it. What I
have found is not reassuring, at least demystifying about this
trial, is that those kinds of questions weren't raised. And
I think it's important, since we're here talking about television
and television coverage, that I found some stories that were
written, for example, in the New York Times, about the
victim and her previous behavior to be much more intrusive
than anything that I've seen. Stories that appeared several months
ago. That's right. So that we, in fact, had print
stories that I thought were much more damaging and that
lived up to the stereotype that victims or women who
are concerned about rape, that's what they've been concerned about,
just those kind of stories. We have not seen that
in this trial. What about that? I would add we
just talked about the Anita Hill-Clarence Thomas hearings. I think
those hearings do, in fact, offer a model in that
they brought into people's living rooms discussions that we had
not previously had. Our experience seems to be that since
those hearings, women who've been troubled by sexual harassment are
much more willing to step forward. So I'm hoping that
ultimately this becomes an empowering experience. Ellen Hume. Well, I
think we're talking about a problem that is not just
a televising of the trial which I do think creates
a distortion in justice for both sides. But I also
think we're talking about a broader problem of the kind
of press attention, the spotlight, that is fixed upon both
sides of the trial. And there are two trials going
on. And in one, facts may matter, which is the
jury trial, one hopes the jury examines the facts, but
in the other, in television and print, it's more often
image, hearsay, rumor and gossip that matter. And that's where
I think the problem is with this kind of overkill
coverage. The one place where you don't, in television where
you don't have everything that Ellen just described is if
you're simply showing the trial. It's when you ambush people
outside the courthouse steps is when you have the Current
Affair reenacting the trial. It's when you have the New
York Times doing the piece it did that you have
all that stuff. If you show the trial, you have
exactly what you're talking about, Ellen. But, of course, most
Americans, frankly, don't have the luxury or the time to
be able to sit in front of a television and
watch every single minute of the trial. Susan Xenarios, I
just want to ask you, what about Ann Lewis's point
that all of this has the effect of demystifying the
process and should make women feel more comfortable? I would
like to believe that that's true. I think in order
to believe that, you also have to assume that we
have a culture, a social structure, that does not stigmatize,
that does understand the trauma that rape victims do go
through, that do have supportive services and a supportive criminal
justice system. We don't. We have a culture that still
stigmatizes. We have a culture that still punishes victims and
blames victims. And I think we have to evolve to
another step before we can really accept the fact that
something like TV coverage will really demystify and then it
won't be as big a problem anymore. Ann Lewis. I
agree that the culture that Susan began with is that's
the world I want to live in, that's the world
I want my daughters to live in. The question is:
How do we get there? And I think it seems
to me as I look at this trial, as I
listen to the conversations I've heard this week, I had
a woman say to me yesterday who works in Washington
that she and her friends have decided now to have
a benefit for a rape crisis center in Washington because
they're convinced they've got to do more. I'm hoping we
can see this discussion, this event, as steps toward that
culture. We can't pretend it doesn't go on. We can't
kid ourselves that we're already there. The issue is how
do we get where we need to be. Well, I
hope you're right. I don't know how we get to
where we need to be, other than people who have
been doing the work that I've been doing have been
doing this for ten, fifteen, twenty years now, and there
are some times in my career that I feel very
strongly we are ten years behind as well. Well, Susan
Xenarios, we thank you, Steven Brill, Ellen Hume, and Ann
Lewis, thank you all. Jim. Still to come on the
NewsHour tonight, complaints about credit reports. But first this is
pledge week on public television. We are taking a short
break now so your public television station can ask for
your support. That support helps keep programs like this on
the air. For those stations not taking a pledge break,
the NewsHour continues with excerpts of a grim forecast about
possible future events in the Soviet Union. The forecaster is
CIA Director Robert Gates. He testified before the House Armed
Services Committee this morning. As the events of the past
three days have demonstrated, nowhere is the progression of events
more confusing, the pace of change more hurtling, or the
conjunction of opportunities and dangers more evident than in the
former Soviet Union, and nowhere is a favorable resolution, that
is, the emergence of stable, friendly, competent democracies in Russia,
Ukraine, and the other former Soviet republics more vital to
the interests of the United States, indeed, of the whole
world. The Communist Old Guard's suicidal attempt to turn back
the clock last August, in fact, brought the prompt collapse
of the Soviet government and breakup of the country. The
newly sovereign republics vary in political complexion and they seem
to be interested in somehow coming together to form a
very loose confederation, but none of them, either individually or
collectively, has the desire or ability to pose as great
a threat to U.S. security as did the USSR for
so many decades. Indeed, most republics of the former USSR
are trying to reduce their defense burden, join Western economic
and security structures, and forge cooperative relationships with the United
States. Nevertheless, the situation is dangerously unstable. All of the
former Soviet republics face enormous economic, social, and political problems
that will make the transition to democracy in a market
economy difficult and potentially dangerous. The economy is in a
freefall with no prospects for reversal in sight. Severe economic
conditions, including substantial shortages of food and fuel in some
areas, the disintegration of the armed forces, and ongoing ethnic
conflict will combine this winter to produce the most significant
civil disorder in the former USSR since the Bolsheviks consolidated
power. Russian President Yeltsin has articulated bold economic reform plans
but it remains to be seen whether he can carry
them out. Market reform will be accompanied by inflation and
unemployment that could generate a social explosion, endangering the stability
of fledgling democratic governments. The possibility cannot be ruled out
that such circumstances could produce a return to authoritarian government,
whether led by reformers desperate to feed the people and
stave off an explosion or by nationalists driven by a
xenophobic, atavistic vision of Russia. I'll now turn to the
specific questions on military matters that you asked me to
address. The threat from Soviet conventional forces is shrinking daily.
It is important though to distinguish between their near-term capabilities
and their long-term potential. Frankly, I cannot envision any realistic
scenario in which a major conventional military threat to neighboring
states would emerge from the former USSR within the next
year or so. Instead, as Soviet leaders themselves have said,
have warned, over the next year or two there may
be greater possibility of conflict in or between various republics.
Such a conflict would probably be preceded by a period
during which indicators such as increasing political turmoil or unbearable
economic privation would provide some warning. Longer-range forecasts should be
made with great diffidence in the wake of the collapse
of this huge empire and in the midst of the
ensuing political, economic, and social revolution. Yet, it is necessary
both for us and for you to look beyond the
next year or two. We must acknowledge the possibility that
a new conventional military threat could reemerge in former Soviet
territory, particularly in Russia. Of more immediate concern is the
possibility that the Soviets will not be able to maintain
adequate safeguards in the process of reducing and dismantling much
of their arsenal of 30,000 nuclear weapons. For now, the
center retains control over those weapons through an elaborate and
effective system operated by the Ministry of Defense and the
general staff. But the center is evaporating before our eyes.
Those who designed the control system never anticipated this. Finally
tonight, a story about credit bureaus. Today, one of the
nation's largest, TRW, settled a lawsuit with 19 states and
the Federal Trade Commission. Among other things, TRW had been
accused of errors that unfairly lowered individuals' credit ratings. Kwame
Holman reports on how these credit businesses work. America runs
on credit. Consumers owed $729 billion in non-mortgage debt alone
at the end of August. A major factor making that
debt possible is the credit reporting industry. It supplies instantaneous
information on how 150 million Americans pay their bills. That
information is bought by stores, banks, even prospective employers to
help them decide whether to offer credit, a mortgage loan,
or a job to an individual. Three giant credit reporting
agencies, Equifax CBI, TRW, and Trans Union, dominate the billion
dollar a year industry with roughly equal shares. Criticized in
the past, it's only because of the bad news they
sometimes bear the credit bureaus have been under perhaps their
most serious assault. These three companies operate at an oligopoly
or monopolistic area and what that means in an economy
is that they don't have any competition. If they don't
have any competition, they stay fat and happy. The stockholders
get big returns, the management gets plush offices and high
salaries, and the consumers don't get what they deserve. Ed
Mierzwinski of the Public Interest Research Group recently sampled 155
complaints about credit bureaus filed with the Federal Trade Commission.
We found that the credit bureaus don't seem to respond
to consumer complaints. 63 percent of the consumers had already
contacted the credit bureau five times or more without satisfaction.
A full 100 percent of the cases, the average complaint
had already gone on for six months without solution before
the consumer contacted the government. The Public Interest Research Group's
study also estimated a third of consumers have serious mistakes
in their credit reports. Another recent survey by the Consumers
Union put the credit report inaccuracy figure at almost 50
percent. There is a serious problem. They have recklessly endangered
the financial lives of consumers for a long time and
we're going to have to do something about it. The
Consumers Union study, by their own admission, is not a
statistically valid study. US Purg by its own admission said,
hey, we drew a few reports of our own, of
our own employees, and we found this, interesting, but anecdotal.
Barry Connelly is a spokesman for Associated Credit Bureaus, the
trade group for the credit reporting industry. How about talking
to the four or five million other Americans who received
disclosure of their file, found nothing wrong with it, and
never spoke up, never said boo, that we never heard
from? That's happening every day. So I don't think you
can just say the industry is in disarray because of,
because of a few anecdotal circumstances. It is a nightmare,
an absolute nightmare. You feel so helpless. Ursula Daniels says
a single mistake in her credit file has thrown her
life into turmoil. My personal health has suffered. I have
worried a lot about this because I am concerned about
my credit rating. I had to get a second job
to be able to pay my bills because I couldn't
get credit anywhere. The manager downstairs in the credit union
actually told me it was because of the bankruptcy notation
on my credit report that they denied me credit. Indeed,
a bankruptcy appears on her credit report. The problem, says
Daniels, is that notation is completely inaccurate. I legally separated
from my husband in 1986, in February. In 1986, in
November of 1986, my husband declared personal bankruptcy and I
was very much concerned at the time to make sure
it does not affect me in any shape or form.
He said, how can it, you have not signed any
papers, I am doing this without your approval. Daniels, a
stenographer at the local power company in Washington, D.C., wrote
to Equifax, the credit bureau that generated her file. Daniels
says two years of letters and calls have done nothing
toward getting the bankruptcy notation corrected. It's like I'm banging
my head on the wall. I don't know what to
do. I can't afford a lawyer. It's been like a
snowball. It's getting worse and worse and worse because of
this bad thing on my credit report. Florida businessman Seymour
Shor says incorrect negative information remains in his credit files,
despite his repeated efforts to get Equifax and TRW to
change it. Everybody's ignored me. If they ignore you, you
can't argue or contest it. The file says he has
a wife named Dottie. Shor, currently unmarried, says he doesn't
even know a Dottie. '58 or '59 was my last
divorce. I was never married to a girl by the
name of Dottie. It says he holds delinquent accounts with
Discover Card and a bank. Shor says he never opened
either account. You didn't open a Discover Card account or
an American Express card account? No. Shor says the inaccuracies
made it impossible to get the major credit card he
needs. You believe that if the information in your Equifax
CBI file and in your TRW file were correct, you
would have been extended credit by Mastercard, Visa? Yes, I
believe so, because there's nothing detrimental. Now, what's it meant
to you that you don't have these major national credit
cards? For example, one time my car had a minor
mechanical repair, was in a mechanic's shop for two days,
I was without transportation. I was going to rent a
car, pay cash. They refused to rent me a car
without a credit card. We told John Baker, a senior
vice president at Equifax, about the complaints of Seymour Shor.
I think it can still happen that a person may,
one, have not been served properly, or that a person
may disagree with the status of information in their file.
But weeks after that interview, Seymour Shor said he still
disagreed with the information in his Equifax credit file that
said he had two delinquent accounts. Shor maintained he never
opened the accounts and wanted to see Equifax's evidence that
he did. Equifax wrote to the NewsHour that the accounts
were verified with credit grantors. But Shor now says the
questionable accounts have been removed. As for Ursula Daniels, Equifax
wrote that the bankruptcy Daniels claimed was inaccurate has been
deleted from her report because Equifax could not verify it.
The focus of this hearing is the Clear Credit Reporting
Act. In June, the controversy reached Capitol Hill. In hearings
before a House Subcommittee on Consumer Affairs, witnesses recounted horror
stories brought on by credit bureaus. The hearings had been
expected to produce new laws requiring the credit reporting industry
to be more accurate and responsive to consumers. The legislation
never got very far in this session of Congress, but
consumers won a victory today in a lawsuit against the
TRW Credit Bureau. It was filed last July by attorneys
general from 19 states, charging TRW didn't do enough to
keep its data accurate and was slow to correct mistakes
in consumers' credit files. Under the terms of today's settlement,
TRW agreed to improve its information gathering procedures to prevent
old or inaccurate data from reappearing in consumers' files. The
company also agreed to investigate actively information challenged by consumers,
check public records, if necessary, to verify the accuracy of
data acquired, establish a toll free hotline for complaints, and
disclose to consumers their individual credit ratings starting in 1993.
John Baker of Equifax says the credit reporting industry is
on a course toward better service for consumers. I think
if we do it right the first time, if we
can tell people what the picture is of how they
stand and what things they can do to improve their
credit and why it is the way it is, we'll
not only shorten our process and make it more effective
and less hassle for the consumer, we'll improve the credit
performance of a lot of people in society, and we'll
help credit grantors who would like to see that happen.
What effect the TRW settlement will have on proposed regulation
of the industry may be determined when Congress returns. Again,
the major stories of this Tuesday, CIA Director Gates told
Congress the Soviet Union was dangerously unstable, there were reports
Soviet President Gorbachev was about to resign. A top aide
denied that report. And the Mideast peace talks began again
in Washington. Good night, Judy. Good night, Jim. That's our
NewsHour for tonight. We'll be back tomorrow night. I'm Judy
Woodruff. Thank you and good night.
