Wisconsin week is made possible in part by a grant from a NRA pipeline company a subsidiary of the coastal corporation. This year marks the beginning of a in our pipeline company's fifth decade of providing natural gas service to Wisconsin's homes businesses and industries. Welcome I'm just north of Milwaukee. And I'm Dave Iverson in Madison Here's what's coming up on tonight's Wisconsin week. The debate over AIDS testing for doctors nurses and patients made news this week. We'll talk about that. Later the battle of the budget continues and medicine will go to the Capitol for a late update. And a recent court decision on sources and confidentiality is the topic of this week's Reporter's Roundtable. Those stories and a summary of the week's news all in tonight's Wisconsin. Here is some of what made news this week good news for Fort McCoy a military base closing commission voted today to spare the base along with six others that were targeted to close. President Bush will make the final decision on that July 15. Michael Green is Governor Tommy Thompson second choice for the open position of the UW system board of regents. Thompson nominated the Milwaukee area attorney Monday after the State Senate refused to confirm Sheboygan businessman Terry Koehler last week. After a 14 hour debate that ended early Thursday morning at the State Assembly approved a proposed 27 billion dollar state budget. It's now in the hands of the Senate for their approval. They will have more on that later. Five black state lawmakers sent a letter this week to G Heilman Brewing Company's president asking the Lacross brewery to withdraw their plan to market a new Malt Liquor Power master. They say it's clear the product is aimed at minorities especially blacks. The new brew has one third more alcohol than other malt likers. They call it socially incorrect and the greatest gig on the globe got going this week Milwaukee's annual summer fest kicked off its 11 day music festival on a beautiful day by the lake. Festival officials expect nearly one million
people to attend this year. The American Medical Association is calling for voluntary AIDS testing of doctors and other health care workers A.M.A. delegates met in Chicago this week voting Wednesday in favor of voluntary testing and shunning a mandatory rule. President of the Wisconsin Medical Society Dr. Kim had to go attended the convention a registered nurse and president of the Wisconsin Federation of nurses and health professionals. Candace alley joins us here in Milwaukee. Doctor let me start with you what effect will the AMH ruling have on health care professionals. I think it's a real affirmation of our ongoing stand in this regard that is if a health care professional feels that he or she may be at risk for some reason for having the HIV infection that he or she should go ahead and be tested. We believe this very very firmly. Additionally if a physician or other health care provider turns out to have HIV disease we strongly recommend that they avoid doing anything that may put others at risk. And we actually firmly endorse the idea of having a committee of experts be set up to provide advice to that healthcare provider in terms of what he or she might do or might not be able to do in terms of continuing to practice what I certainly do not want to put patients at risk. What obligation does a health care provider worker have in letting the patient know that they may have the HIV virus. Well they certainly believe that if a health care worker or provider feels that they or an objective panel of experts to feels that they are doing anything invasive which might put a patient at risk then that should that activity should stop right away. Candace alley your concerns are safety in the workplace is voluntary testing and nuff. Or do you see this as really just to ease people's fears. Well I think it is important to ease people's fears because they should be confident in the health care system. But we really reject testing mandatory or voluntary voluntary testing. It sounds as if there should be testing then but we're only going to do it voluntary. I mean if you just are going to work. I don't think it would work if you needed it then. Then you would be talking about something more mandatory our position is that you don't need to do testing either voluntary or mandatory to ensure patient safety. Now for people to voluntarily go and get tested in order that they may have their own health care needs taken care of that would be important but I think confidence confidence in your provider really comes more from the fact. That a provider who cares about your health isn't going to do something that intentionally to danger you. And there are no there are no cases of nurses for instance. Transmitting to their patients through their normal nursing procedures.
HIV or AIDS disease there is only one incident and one physician or one dentist rather and we're not even clear how that really occurred so I think it it actually creates more fear by suggesting there should be any kind of testing and provides confidence. All right Doctor what are the what are the downsides of mandatory testing. Well I think mandatory testing leads to a very big false sense of security. One of the problems is that a test at any particular time just means that that in and if it was negative just means that that individual did not have the disease three months ago or there's a 95 out of 100 percent chance that the that they did not have the disease three months ago. It's a false sense of security. Likewise if you have mandatory testing how Waffen do you do it. Do you do it once a year and you could be missing if you just did it once a year 15 months when that person was potentially infectious to others or do you do it once a month. Do you do it once a week. Do you do it once a day. Do you do it once an hour. Even doing it once an hour does not lead you to. Close to 100 percent assurance that that individual does not have HIV disease. However I strongly disagree with your other guest. I certainly think that voluntary testing should be encouraged of any public member or any health professional member who thinks that he or she may be having gauged in activity or have been exposed to circumstances where they may have HIV disease and for their own health. I strongly advocate that on a voluntary basis that they get tested because early intervention can help their general public health care professionals. All right you want to respond to that. Well I think that voluntary testing for your own health is very important and we should encourage death for everyone not just health providers but to suggest that voluntary testing is somehow is the answer to alleviate people's fears more importantly to alleviate people's fears is the fact that that this is not a way that people are going to get AIDS the way people get AIDS or become HIV positive is not from their health care providers. What responsibility is the health health care profession have in and telling a health care provider if they have the HIV virus that they should no longer practice that they should retire. And what is the liability liability of the health care profession if if the Hib virus is transmitted to a patient. Well I certainly feel and we certainly feel that a health care provider if he or she is positive should be strictly avoiding any activity which even remotely theoretically might possibly transmit that virus to a patient. And I think we have to be emphatic on this. To continue to enjoy some trust from the public we have to do this to assure the public trust in this regard and I think any health care provider if they're doing less than that is being irresponsible. Quickly Candace let me ask you what as a as a consumer what should I be asking my health care provider when I when I see him or her. I think you ought to find out what their track record is and on the care that they've given to other individuals you should be more concerned. About whether or not their patients get good care whether or not their mortality and infection rates. But you ask them Do you have HIV virus. I don't think that you that that will make any difference because I don't they cannot and are pinioned transmitted to you through their normal practices. So it would not be necessary for you to know your doctor do you agree with that. No I go a step further I think of a patient who has a concern whether or not their health care provider has HIV disease it's appropriate for that patient to ask the provider just as it is for the provider to ask the patient on that. I don't mind that we have to leave it sorry wish we had more time to have Scott thanks very much and Candace Ellis thank you appreciate the time. With you. Thank you. As we tape our program this evening the state Senate is busy revising the budgetary handiwork of the state assembly the assemblies property tax relief package will receive Of course the bulk of the Senate's attention. Now the assembly's plan is one that both gives and taketh away as it gives homeowners a property tax break but takes away certain income tax deductions. It gives a break generally speaking to those of somewhat lower and moderate incomes but hits harder at corporations and some services that are currently exempt from the sales tax will get the latest now on where the state Senate is apt with the property tax package. Joining us to State Senator Chuck qual of the assistant majority leader in the Senate he joins us now from the state capital. And in Milwaukee representing the Republican view on all of this Senator Marco Faro. Chuck wallow you are out of your caucus which is Caucus ing as we speak. Tell us where you are at at this point in terms of changing the package that the assembly delivered to you. Well I think that we basically like the distribution formula that the assembly has for property tax relief. But I think you will see the Senate eliminate the proposal that they had to reduce people's deduction availability for home mortgage interest and other elements. OK so when you say you like what they've done you like the fact that they're targeting homeowners but you don't like the fact that consequently those homeowners would also lose some of their income tax deduction. That's right and we'll get rid of that we'll probably retain other elements of their plan as well and we think that will have a very good property tax relief plan coming out of the state Senate. All right now the question has to be if you're not going to pay for the property tax relief. Buy some of those losing some of those income tax deductions. How are you going to pay for it. Well I think there are a number of options available to us all of which we think are infinitely preferable to eliminating or scaling back people's deductibility of home mortgage interest and other elements such I think will do it in a progressive way and there are a number of different things that we can do there are sales tax options obviously. There are also the options of income taxes in very high income brackets taxing the wealthiest citizens of the state. There are number of different ways that this can be paid for and we think not yet the average middle income taxpayer. And will you come up then with a package that you think that the governor who after all has been threatening all week long all month long really to veto all of this can you come up with something that he's going to accept. While the governor seems to have reverted lately to his Tommy knoll position no seems to be the word most frequently on his out of his mouth. But we think and I was in a leadership meeting with the governor and I asked him about his position where he was that on property tax relief and he said he'd rather not say anything to us in with regard to what he would accept until we establish a position. So I think the likely process here is that we will establish our position settle on a Senate position and then probably some negotiations will take place with the governor and we hope that he'll be receptive to our position and the fact that. His budget does not provide property tax relief we're trying to fill that void and do something for the homeowners and farmers in this state. And hopefully he'll be willing to listen to us and we'll certainly be willing to listen to him as to where he wants to raise the money in order to do that. Senator Margaret Farrow to get the Republican view on this. Any encouraging words in what Chuck wallows saying Margaret Farrow do you like the fact that the appear at this hour to be restoring some of those income tax deduction to anything you like. Well I think I'm I'm hearing a little bit of what I like but it sounds as though we're still looking for a lot of money from somewhere to do some of the things that the assembly started down the road to do and what I feel was quite an irresponsible way. I think we have to be very concerned that we don't continue to look for new pots of money continue to look for a rise in taxes while people are saying what are you spending it and now how much more spending can we afford in this state. So while I wanted to be reasonable I'm not sure if we're going to see what I would call reasonable coming out of this package. Do you still see even the need to focus on spending on cost controls in schools is that something that you think the assembly did not go far enough and I think we have to look at the spending side I think when the governor has said and many of us strongly support him that there will be no major tax increases and that we have to be serious about spending on all levels of government. I think we have to look at the way it has been viewed from the assembly's perspective as you mentioned they didn't put cost controls in their budget package. It's a separate package. They are saying so the governor can't veto it in the same way with a line item. I think it's because it was a weak package it was only four years in length. I've been in local government if you would know that something is only going to be holding down your spending for four years. Then you just defer things defer some maintenance here and there and end up in the long run spending more money because you let things get out of hand. All right we've got to look better and much more strongly at cost controls. And let's hear one more time then from Chuck wallow on that point is the Senate going to do anything to strengthen cost controls. Absolutely we will have cost controls in our package the thing that people have to remember is the governor did have a major tax increase in his budget it was a property tax increase. That's why we're in the bad position we're in in the Senate because the governor didn't provide to take care of it. Our plan will start out by using the lottery money and turn returning that back to people. The second thing that our plan will do is get away from taxing the necessity portion of a home the first 30 $5000 of a home will be off for purposes of taxation for school taxes and maybe even a little bit more for farms when we get through in the Senate so I think it's a good start and I hope that we can build on that. All right and we'll see what you do for the rest of the evening in the weekend I'm sure at the state capital in Margaret Farrow in Milwaukee thank you. Joining us now for a further assessment of what all of this means is the head of the Wisconsin Taxpayers Alliance Jim Morgan. Help us sift through this Jim Morgan. What strikes you as being a plus what strikes you as being a minus about what the assembly and the Senate are so far concocting. Well it seems to me that there is not much difference between what the Senate and the assembly are doing and they both apparently are still going to try to earmark. Property tax relief from lottery funds only to residential owners. The problem that I have with that is one of accountability. Here are the here's the bulk of property and you're going to exempt a major amount. And these are the people that you want to appear at school board meetings municipal meetings and discuss with their elected officials what the budget level should be. I'm not sure I'm following you well I think you're in effect what you're doing is saying we're going to lower your taxes and so are they going to come to the school board meeting next time. Probably not. OK so so what can be done here I mean this you know the proverbial property tax dragon is out there and it sounds like you're saying there's really no way to slay this because nothing everything has a downside. Well every every time they've attempted to do this whether some school age shared revenues. Various limits before they have network I mean the property tax just continues to climb. And I think that the expenditure Commission which Governor Earl appointed as suggested that there had to be some some pretty tight controls and that was a way of getting at it particularly at the compensation level. And that apparently so far I have not seen any really tight controls of them post so you tend to agree then with what Senator Farrow was saying that the first thing we've got to look at here if we're ever going to slay the property tax dragon is to reduce costs on the spending side on the school's side
at least to limit the increases certainly. And is there any way around it seems like we're always you know the you know rob Peter to pay Paul syndrome we're saying what will lower property taxes but on the other hand we got to lose these income tax deductions we're going to give you a break here but we've got to take this away. There's no way around that is there. There's If you're going to have property major property tax relief you undoubtedly have to have a tax increase somewhere else and that's what I think is missing from these proceedings. This is a major step. This is a major change in state policy and it seems to me you have to have a thorough airing as to what the effects are what the ultimate effect is going to be on the tax payer if you get done putting the sales taxes into effect and repealing some of the income tax. Are you worried that the people just aren't paying enough attention that this is all going on in those little hallways of the state capitol and those of us who have to pay all of these bills as of course legislators do too aren't really focusing enough on the major policy question. My impression and I we have a clipping service and I keep reading these clippings of the news. The question on the street and the question is we will increase taxes to pay to help reduce school spending and the answer is uniformly No. I don't think they get by the first part there's just a general reluctance to have an increase in taxes. Very quick last piece of advice here too to taxpayers and voters around the state. What should we be doing here at the end of June end of the fiscal year what you would pay attention to. Well I think you have to pay very close attention to what joint Finance Committee is doing that these are very important decisions that they're making. Ultimately the governor will make one as well. But this is the most crucial bill that's passed now the session of the legislature and you've got a lot of know how you feel about Walter to pay attention and to Morgan thanks very much. The U.S. Supreme Court ruled Monday news organizations can be sued when they break promises and give up the names of confidential sources. The nine justices heard a case filed against the Minneapolis Star Tribune and The St. Paul Pioneer Press regarding that issue. The high court's five to four decision says the Constitution's Free Press protections do not guard the media from lawsuits when they publish such names and that reporters promises of confidentiality are legally enforceable here in Milwaukee WTMJ TV political reporter Lynn Springer's joins us. And from Madison Wisconsin State Journal state capitol reporter Jeff Mayers is with us. Lynn has the press lost some freedom this week with what is the dickens out of me to think that a newspaper would have overruled a reporter who gathered a story promising that that name would not be revealed. I wonder if the newspaper would have even had the story had the reporter told the source up front your name will be used. So it's it frightens the dickens out of me to think that that that. The newspaper overruled the reporter using What's the ripple effect for for you as a reporter. Well you know I I really believe strongly Joe that you you're always unnamed sources in stories as sparingly as you can because I think the public questions when someone will not come forward and put their name next to a story and I understand their concern. But there are times when stories are of a nature where it is impossible to put a name next to it and a story that is really for the public good I I protect my sources at all possible costs. I would be trouble if I was working. What if you get into a situation though where your news director says Sorry Len. Well I'm going to divulge the name of yours Well I that's a problem because I think what it may do is stifle some reporters from bringing forward good stories if there is a fear that in fact a source will not be protected especially if you're a reporter who's been around 15 years and you can get your people do trust you with information. Sometimes Joe it's not even information that gets into a story. It may be backgrounding that will serve you a few months down the road when a story breaks. So I'm troubled. Jeff are you going to have trouble finding sources now. No I don't think that on a day to day basis I don't think this. Really has a limiting effect. This was an extraordinary situation I think and it was a in the realm of campaign mudslinging. So the case could come up. The I guess the lesson here is don't promise anything you can't keep. And well but in this particular bill in this particular case the reporter in Prague made the promise and the reporter kept the promise the editor didn't. Well that's I mean again her editor had a tough situation like this I think the lesson here is say I'll have to check on it. This is in the realm of it was a potentially damaging leak of court records I assume but I don't know for sure. Perhaps a reporter couldn't find find the court records independently if the reporter could have done that. That a major problem so there are ways around this the goal is for me is I don't know. I don't want to gather news that I can put in the newspaper and I'm trying to get information attributed information valid information that can go in a newspaper otherwise it doesn't do me or the readers much good. Lynn when is the public served by unnamed sources. Well I think you know when there are stories that clearly point out wrongdoing possibly health and safety and that can run a broad spectrum Joe. I think there are occasions where a name is not used. I know it and our particular news organization one of the things we attempt to do is when we get a tip. And being a political reporters I'm sure Jeff can can relate to most of the good information you get comes from the other side. So you know you have to verify this information but I think what we often attempt to do is see if we can get someone to go on the record. We have information we can work with we cannot attribute it to this person but can we get someone who will advance that help us advance that story in a way that might make the public embrace it a little bit more easier perhaps for Jeff in a newspaper but in television. It's a difficult thing and it's easier for a newspaper reporter to put a byline on a story and for some reason maybe just because of historical perspective with Watergate in a lot of stories that you look at from the past where newspapers broke big stories. It is easier to do a story it's harder for me to come on camera and say Hey folks I got a wild story that you're just not going to believe. It's harder it's a hard a credibility thing than it is I think sometimes maybe Jeff has and you agree with me I don't think newspapers should slip into the habit of putting in attributed stories in a newspaper but we leak. Sources leak stories to is usually on the proposals airing trial balloons but it is the I think the unusual case. And and I think reporters are naturally cautious when somebody comes to you with information is going to damage somebodies credibility personal credibility. It has to do with the criminal record or something well then you're telling I go up and you say oh wait a minute I have to say why are they doing this and you have to then proceed cautiously from there. Do you think that all reporters have lost a little credibility given a such a well I don't think there's any question that we are not viewed in the same respect that we were some years back Joe I bearly a politician. Yeah that's true. But I don't want to you know we used to be sort of we were supposed to be the you know the eyes and ears of the public and we were supposed to be representing their interests. And if you look at recent polls certainly reporters do not are not held in the esteem that I think a lot of reporters would like to. So is it tougher for you to get people to talk to you. You know trust you I don't think so I haven't experienced that but maybe that's a personal thing I think in your business 15 years and maybe it's just because people know you have a trusting face. Jeff what about you. No I mean this is a situation where every reporter is to build his or her own credibility is no doubt about that but that's why it's keyed to. Play it straight play down the middle and use attributed sources and if you do that most of the time you don't get yourself or your or your employer in trouble and now that doesn't mean you don't take chances once in a while but I think that's a good general rule to follow. All right you'll be checking with your editor though when you have an unnamed source from well I guess I want to know all right and what about you in the past when I've had stories where sources have come forward with good stories. I have shared that information with someone on the staff someone I trust within our new hierarchy and I've never presented a problem for me. Well interesting. And I thank you both Jeff Mayers in Madison and Lynn Springer's here in Milwaukee thanks both of you. Three years ago we embarked on a unique adventure a public television in Milwaukee and Madison working together to report on and analyze newsworthy events throughout the state of Wisconsin. In that time we brought you stories as diverse as the debate over Indian Treaty Rights and the changes in the athletic department at UW Madison. The response we received from you has been very gratifying but you've also let us know that part of what you value most about public television is its unique local flavor. We've heard you Wisconsin we will be coming to you out of Madison for one more month here at Channel 10 and in Madison. Plans are already under way for local programs we think will be as exciting and informative as you've told us Wisconsin week has been. This program has truly been a partnership not just between Milwaukee and Madison but with you. And we thank you for your letters your comments your criticisms and your praises. Special thanks also to Frederica running for producing the Milwaukee segments of this program. And so for the last time. Good night and thanks to Frederica as well as Joe mentioned we will be continuing the program for the next month out of Madison So we hope you'll stay tuned for that and then we'll all be on to new and interesting adventures. So thanks Joe and good luck.
